In today's video, we're going to take a look at answering the big question.
What is calculus?
And really, calculus is going to be the answer to three questions.
The first question that we're going to attempt to answer, and we're going to focus on here
in chapter two, is what is it getting close to?
And this in calculus, we're going to affectionately call the limit.
The second question we're going to attempt to answer, and it's really the focus of chapter
three, is what is the slope?
Specifically what is the slope at this given point?
And there we're going to call that in calculus the derivative.
The third question we're going to attempt to answer is what is the area?
And we're not going to really dive into that question until we get to calc two next term,
but for now I'll just tell you that that is the integral of the function.
So to kind of set this up, we're going to take a look at first the tangent problem.
For the tangent problem, I want to first consider how fast these lines are changing.
And we really call that our rate of change.
So I'm going to put three graphs up here.
First graph is going to be y equals two-thirds x minus one.
And this graph, I'll have a y intercept at negative one, and it'll rise two and run three
to another point.
So it's going to look something like that.
The second graph we're going to look at is y equals negative three x plus two.
And so that graph has a y intercept at two, and it slopes down three over one, and it
looks like this guy.
And the third graph we're going to look at is y equals negative one.
And that's just a flat line right at negative one.
And the question here that we're considering is how fast are these lines changing?
How are these lines changing?
The first graph here, the two-thirds x minus one, we see it is going uphill from left to
right, but it's going uphill slowly.
It's kind of gradually working its way uphill, which is different than the second graph because
not only is it going downhill, but it's also going down much quicker.
It's going downhill quickly.
And that's going to be different than this third graph, which really isn't going up or
down.
It's kind of flat lined.
So we'll say this is a flat or no change.
Now what's interesting here is these lines are really easy to see how the graph is changing
because they're just a straight line.
They're always changing at the same rate.
A is always going up slowly, B is always going down quickly, and C is always flat without
any change.
But this is not always the case.
Actually, most functions do not have a constant rate of change.
For example, if we consider the graph, y equals x squared plus two.
Now y equals x squared plus two has a vertex rate at two, it's got the point at one three
and negative one three and then six and negative six, or I'm sorry, three six and three negative
three six.
So here is the graph of x squared plus two.
Now if we consider at the point zero where x is equal to zero, if I were to look at
that graph, it's kind of leveled out there at the bottom, we could draw a line that's
tangent to that point, and right now it has a slope of zero.
It's really not changing at that point.
It's not going up or down, it's kind of leveled out at the bottom.
It's a little different than if I consider the point that's just one to the right, because
at that point it's actually got a much steeper tangent line that could be drawn that barely
attaches it.
And there, the slope of that graph, it's going uphill, it's actually rising two and running
one.
If I could grab a different color, we could look at this point at negative one, or negative
two.
Looking at the point at negative two, we see it's very, very, very steep.
In fact, the slope there is going to be negative four, and we'll talk later about how we can
actually calculate those exact slopes.
But what's interesting here is this graph starts out with a very steep negative slope,
and then it levels out and turns into a positive slope, which gets steeper and steeper.
I've already hinted at this, but the lines that touch the graph
are what we're going to call tangent lines, where they touch the graph in one point and
then go off into the distance.
So the question we're going to attempt to find out is, what is the slope of these tangent
lines?
To do that, we're going to set up another thing called the secant line.
We can actually approximate the rate of change
for a tangent line with what we're going to call a secant line.
Here's what we mean by that.
So we've got some graph here, we're going to say it comes in, goes up, and levels off,
and right here we're going to say is A, means if we go up, this point here is going to be
at F of A, and then a little bit over from A is B, and if we go up from B, that point
right there will be at F of B. If we connect A and B with a line, that is called a secant
line.
A secant line is going to go through two points on the line.
In fact, we know what those two points are, let's go ahead and label those in brown.
The x-coordinate of this first point is A, and the y-coordinate is F of A, and the second
one with B, the x-coordinate is B, and the y-coordinate is F of B. If we wanted to calculate
the slope, which we always use M for slope, of the secant line, we know it's y2 minus
y1 over x2 minus x1.
That would be F of B minus F of A over the B minus the A. This is going to be an important
formula for us, the formula for the slope of the secant line.
What's interesting about this is as A and B get closer and closer together, let's draw
another graph, as A and B get close, let's see if I can draw that same graph on here approximately,
and if we keep A at about the same spot, and so F of A is still at the same spot, but if
we put B right next to it, notice it's closer now for F of B, the secant line that connects
them is starting to look like a tangent line that only touches in one spot.
In other words, as A and B get closer together, we get closer to the tangent line.
This is the big idea that we're going to go after today, is can we get A and B close enough
together so that we can estimate what is the tangent line.
Let's try it though with some numbers in there to make things a little clearer.
So let's do number four, we're going to do an example here, we're going to estimate
the slope and equation, while we're at it, of the tangent line to the function F of x
equals two x squared minus three at the point two comma five.
Now the idea here is we want to estimate what it is using a different x and y point
where we're going to try and get closer and closer and closer to our actual point of two.
So we know at two the y coordinates five, so we'll start kind of close to two, maybe
we'll start at two point one, then we'll get a little closer, two point oh one, then we'll
get a little closer, two point oh oh one, and then finally a little bit closer, two point
oh oh one, and we're going to see what y equals at each of these points.
We know at two it's going to hit five, but what's it going to hit as we get close to
two, as we pull B closer and closer to our A. Fortunately this is going to be really
easy to do on our calculators, so if we turn our calculators on and hit the y equals button,
we can type in our function in y equals, and our function is two x squared minus three.
Then what we're going to do is if we hit the second button, and then right above graph
we see in blue it says table, and we should be able to delete these values out of here.
If you cannot delete the values out of your table, first hit second and then above window
you see it says table set, and we're going to change the independent variable the x to
ask, so that we can pick what we want that x to be equal to.
Now go back to second table, and now we can enter in our values we want for x. The first
value we want is two point one, the second value is two point oh one, the third value
is two point oh one, and the third value is two point oh oh one.
And we start to see we get these values for y. Let's record them in our y column here.
That's five point eighty two, the next one was five point oh eight oh two, the next one
was five point oh oh eight, and then finally it was five point oh oh eight.
So now what we really end up with is a third column, let me label it in black here, x comma
y is going to be our third column, these are going to be our points that we're going to
be compared to the original point of two five.
So x comma y is two point one comma five point eighty two, then we had two point oh one comma
five point oh eight oh two, then we had two point oh oh one comma five point oh oh eight,
and then finally two point oh oh oh one comma five point oh oh oh eight.
We're going to use these points and the original point, the two comma five, to calculate a
whole bunch of slopes of the secant line, and again we're going to use the calculator
to help us out with that to make some of these calculations easier.
If we hit second quit, it'll take us back to the home screen, quit is right above the
mode button, and then we're just going to type in our slope formula where the numerator
and denominator need to be in parentheses.
So the y two we calculated from the first point was five point eighty two minus the
y one was five, because we always go back to the original point, divided by the x one
from the point we found, the two point one, whoops need to put it in parentheses, two
point one minus the two, close the parentheses, and when we hit enter we find our slope right
now is eight point two.
So let's go ahead and record that, our slope right now is eight point two, but then we're
going to move a little bit closer.
Now we're going to use our second point, which is the two point oh one comma five point
oh eight oh two, again y two minus y one, so five point oh eight oh two minus the y from
our original point of five, divided by the two point oh one minus the two, again remember
numerator and denominator in parentheses, and now we have a slope of eight point oh two.
Let's try our third point, our third point was five point oh eight minus the five, divided
by the two point oh one minus the two, and now we're going to get this nice pretty eight,
our slope right now is eight.
In fact when we do it again for the third point we're going to get the exact same thing
because we are so close, the difference is going to be minuscule, five point oh oh eight
minus the five, divided by the two point oh oh one minus the two, and again we get eight
for the slope.
So we can use this fact to estimate the slope of the tangent line now.
We see the slope of the secant line is getting closer and closer to eight point oh, so the
slope of the tangent line is probably that eight point oh that we're getting closer and
closer to.
So if it is eight point oh then we're ready to actually calculate the equation at that
point, and going back to our algebra days a good equation to remember that the equation
of the line is equal to y equals m times x minus x one plus y one, where x one and y
one are a point we know that's on the line, and m is the slope.
This is a good equation to commit to memory because we are going to use this equation
a lot in this course.
So for our purposes we've got y equals m, the slope of the tangent line we just found
out was eight times x minus x one, going back to our original point the x coordinate was
two plus the y coordinate of five.
The equation of our tangent line two x squared minus three at two five is this guy y equals
eight times x minus two plus five.
We can use this concept in physics to look at what's called the average velocity and
the instantaneous velocity.
Velocity is really talking about speed, so if we're talking about the average velocity
or the average speed, speed doesn't really have direction and velocity does have direction,
it's only real different.
The average velocity of an object can be found by the velocity average is equal to the function
at the first point at the initial point of time minus the function at the final point
in time, all over the difference in the times.
And really you'll notice that this equation, while I mark it as an important equation that
we need to know for our course, it really is the same equation as the secant that we've
already worked with.
And then if that's the average velocity over an amount of time, we can find the instantaneous
velocity
or how fast the object is moving at a specific point in time instead of an average over a
range, it is found by making T2 closer to T1.
In other words, the same idea we did before, if we try closer and closer and closer numbers,
we'll get closer and closer to the actual instantaneous velocity, which is the slope
of a tangent line.
So let's try an example problem where we can see that actually done.
Let's see, an object is dropped from the top of a 144 foot cliff
and it will land three seconds later.
We can actually find the function for its height.
Its height is given by the function f of x equals negative, actually let's not do f
of x, let's make it more descriptive, we're doing height, so let's say height of T or
height of time is equal to negative 16 T squared plus 144.
We're going to find the average velocity between 2 seconds and 2.01 seconds and between 1.99
seconds and 2 seconds.
So the average velocity just after 2 seconds and the average velocity just before 2 seconds
and see what we can learn about that.
So first for the first point, I'll do this first point in blue, the average velocity,
we need to know what the height is at those two points.
So we'll say h of 2 and I'm just going to plug this into our calculator.
Negative 16 times 2 squared plus 144, when I do that on the calculator we get 80.
So the height of 2 is 80 and the height just afterwards at 2.01, again if I plug that into
my calculator, negative 16 times 2.01 squared plus 144, that's going to equal 79.3584, 79.35,
let's just round it to 8.
So the average velocity then is going to be the slope between these two points.
So the average velocity is equal to y2, which is 80, minus y1, 79.358 over the difference
in the x's, 2 minus 2.01.
The average velocity here is negative 64.2 feet per second.
So just after 2 seconds the object is moving at 64.2 feet per second, it's negative because
it's going down.
Let's see what's happening just before, we'll do this in green off to the right here so
we can keep these separate.
So we need to know what the height is at 1.99 and what the height is at 2, fortunately we
already calculated the height at 2, that's 80.
If we put the 1.99 in our calculator we'll end up with approximately 80.638, so to find
the average velocity here we'll subtract the y's divided by subtracting the x's.
So 80.638 minus 80 divided by 1.99 minus 2, and when we do this we find out the average
velocity just before 2 seconds is negative 63.8 feet per second.
And what you'll notice is both of these are really close, 0.2 away of each side of the
negative 64, so we can actually find out or estimate the instantaneous velocity
to be somewhere in the middle of these two guys, so between 64.2 and 63.8 it's probably
at 2 seconds at that exact moment in time moving approximately negative 64 feet per
second, that would be the tangent line or the instantaneous velocity.
So with this preview so far we've answered really the first two questions, we've been
looking at what is the slope or the tangent and then also what is that secant line getting
close to, let's take a look at a little preview of the third question of calculus, we won't
spend much time on this because it's really a second quarter calculus question, but the
question is what is the area, here's what that looks like in calculus.
And back to part C addressing the area problem.
We are going to consider, actually let's make this number one, consider the area under y
equals x minus three squared plus one between the x values of zero to three.
We're going to need a really tall graph for this, that shouldn't be too bad, we've got
plenty of space here, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, eleven.
So we know x squared is the parabola shape, the minus three moves it to the right three,
the plus one moves it up one.
So the graph is going to look something like this, and it wants the area between zero and
three, so between zero and three what we're really doing is saying what is the area that
fills in underneath the graph, what we want is the area shaded in green here, is how much
area is underneath the graph.
So we can estimate it, and the way we're going to estimate it is we're going to say, hey,
it's really easy to find the area of a rectangle.
So we can use rectangles where the right corner of the rectangle actually touches the graph
that we're talking about.
So let me see if I can recreate the graph here.
So it hits at nine, three, one.
Is that right?
It hits at ten.
So here's our graph, roughly drawn, and what we're going to do is we're going to take each
point and make it into a rectangle where the right corner of the rectangle touches the graph.
So each rectangle is one wide, and the first rectangle is one high, the second rectangle
you see is too high, and the third rectangle, I think it's five high?
Yeah, it's five high.
So we could say that the area under here is five plus two plus one, or the area is approximately
eight when we use rectangles on the right side, where the right corner hits the graph.
But we could also do it the other way because the problem here is we end up a little bit
short.
Let's use just some gray space for the short.
Notice we miss this gray triangle, and another gray triangle, and another gray triangle.
We're short because we went to the right.
So to avoid being short, we could draw rectangles that the left corner touches the graph.
And see how that compares.
So one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten, and one, two, three, four,
five.
Putting our key points on here of three, one, move over one and up one, over one and up one,
two, three, and then finally the nine.
So if I wanted to draw rectangles where the left corner touched the graph, we would start
at the top point and say, okay, come out from the left corner, and there is my first rectangle.
Then come out from the left corner, go over one unit, and there's your next.
And come out from the left, and there's our next rectangle.
And so we end up with three rectangles again.
And we can find the area of those rectangles.
The first rectangle on the left has a height of ten.
Actually, let's put, whoops, let's put, ah, wrong color.
Let's put the heights on the right here.
The height of ten, the second rectangle is a height of one, two, three, four, five, and
the third rectangle has a height of two.
So when we add those together, the area that we end up with is going to be ten plus five
plus two.
The area comes out to be approximately seventeen.
But again, we've got a problem.
Because now instead of having too little area, we end up with too much area.
We've kind of got this area that I'm going to color in in gray that sticks up above the
graph.
So the first time we were too low, the second time we're too high.
How are we going to estimate what the actual value is?
Well, we could estimate, since we're just estimating, the actual area is in the middle
of these two values.
So we could just average the eight and seventeen, eight plus seventeen divided by two.
When we do that, we get a twelve point five.
So we're going to say our final estimate is that the area underneath y equals x minus
three squared plus one between zero and three.
We're going to estimate that it's about twelve point five.
Well, as you might expect, this process is not perfect because actually the actual area
is twelve exactly.
So we've got an extra point five out of it, but that's not a bad estimate for just kind
of drawing rectangles and estimating and making a guess at it.
Now in calc two, we'll talk about some methods to find that exact area of twelve, but for
now I just want to kind of expose you, this whole lesson today is just a preview of calculus.
Just expose you to the idea of the three questions that we're going to be addressing in calculus.
What is it getting close to?
We call that a limit.
We're going to focus on that in chapter two.
What is the slope?
We call that the derivative and we'll focus on finding that in chapter three.
And then finally, what is the area?
We call that the integral and we're going to find that in calc two.
So I hope you enjoyed this preview of calculus.
Take a look at the practice problems in the book and I'll look forward to seeing you in
class.
As we dive into our study of calculus, we need to answer the first foundational question
of what is a limit?
So we're going to answer that question kind of broadly today and then a little bit later
we'll answer it more precisely.
So we're going to kind of say the intuitive definition of a limit.
So the general idea that we're going for when we say a limit, we're saying what value,
what should be there, even if it is not there?
What should be in the function, even if it's not actually in the function at that point?
And symbolically how we'll represent that is we will say that the limit as x approaches
some number of f of x equals l or the limit.
So again, mathematically or in words what those symbols up above there mean is that
as x gets closer to a, the f of x gets closer to l.
So we're trying to figure out what is the function approaching?
What is it getting closer to as our x gets closer to some value of a?
So there's two main ways that we're going to do this.
The first way that we can find a limit is what we're going to call the table method,
where we basically take that definition that says as x gets closer to a, well let's try
and get closer to a.
We're going to try values closer and closer to a or to that number that x is supposed to
get close to.
So what I mean by that is we are going to find the limit as x approaches two of x squared
minus four over x minus two.
Now if I were to just try and find what two actually equals in this function, you'll notice
it's going to end up being undefined.
There's actually nothing at two.
But we're not interested in what's actually happening at two.
We're interested in what should be at two, even if it's not at two.
So to set this up, we're going to make a table where we're going to take various values of
x that are going to get closer and closer to two, and we're going to see how that compares
to f of x or our function.
So we'll start maybe at 1.9, that's a little shy of two, and then we'll get closer, 1.99.
And then a little closer, 1.999, and even closer, 1.9999, we're going to get really
close to two and see what happens to f.
Now an important part of a limit is it has to work on both sides.
So we can't just do values a little bit smaller than two.
We need to pick values for x and calculate f of x that are a little bit bigger than two.
So we might start with 2.1, go a little bit closer, 2.01, a little bit closer, 2.001,
and a little bit closer, 2.001.
Now fortunately our calculators' table settings are going to make these calculations quite
nice for us.
So if we turn on our calculator and go into the y equals function, I can hit clear to
delete anything that might be in there already.
And the function we're working with is x squared minus four over x minus two.
Now to preserve the order of operations, I need to put in parentheses the numerator
and denominator.
So x squared minus four, close the parentheses, divided by, open up parentheses, x minus two,
and close the parentheses.
And now we'll go to our table by hitting second table, and there's values in here from a previous
problem we don't need, so I'm going to delete those all out.
Our x's here, go start at 1.9, enter, then we've got 1.99, oops, too many nines, enter,
then three nines, 1.999, and then finally 1.999, four nines.
There we go.
And what we see is we get 3.9, 3.99, 3.999, so let's record these.
So first we start with 3.9, then f of x becomes 3.99, then it became 3.999, then it became
3.999.
You can kind of see that's getting closer and closer to a very clear number, but to
check it we have to go on the other side.
So let's delete out what's in the table here, and let's check these other values.
The 2.1, the 2.01, the 2.001, oops, too many zeros again, and then the 2.0001.
And we kind of see the same pattern here, it won't always be a clear pattern like this,
but this one's kind of nice, so we can record our f of x became 4.1, 4.01, 4.001, and then
finally 4.0001.
And what we see is from the left side these numbers are getting closer to four, growing
and growing and growing to four.
From the right side these values are also getting closer and closer, shrinking and shrinking
down to four as we shrink and shrink down to two.
And so what we can say then is that the limit as x approaches two of x squared minus four
over x minus two seems to be from this table equal to four.
Now this doesn't mean that x squared minus four over x minus two is equal to four when
x is two, because it's undefined at that point.
There's nothing there.
The limit is just what should be there even if it's not.
So we'd say four probably should be in there, but it's not.
As we get really close to two we're getting really close to four.
Let's try another example.
The table method's really nice when it works, but it doesn't always work as beautifully as
we would hope.
We're going to find the limit as x approaches zero of the cosine of one over x.
And again, just like before, we're going to take some values for x that are a little
bit smaller.
It's a little bit smaller than zero.
Might be negative point one, negative point oh one, negative point oh oh one, negative
point oh oh oh one, and we're going to find what f of x equals.
And then we'll try some values for x that are just to the right of zero.
Point one, point oh one, point oh oh one, and point oh oh oh one.
Getting closer and closer to zero from each side.
Again we're going to have our calculator do the dirty work for us, but we need to change
the function so we'll clear out the old function.
Starting with our function is cosine of one over x, close the parentheses.
Now something to check if I hit the mode button, which is right next to second, I should see
that radians is highlighted.
We will always be in radians in this course, so make sure the radians is highlighted.
So we've got the cosine of one over x, and then when we go to our table, hit second table,
I've got to delete out the old values.
And for the first column we've got negative point one, negative point oh one, then we've
got negative point oh oh one, whoops got an extra zero, negative point oh oh one, and
finally negative point oh oh oh one.
And this guy seems quite all over the board.
What you see is f of x begins by equaling negative point eight three nine one, then it was positive
point eight six two three, then it was positive point five six two three eight, then it was
negative again at point nine five two two.
Let's try, delete these out, let's try the other side, see what patterns we see on the
other side.
Point one, point oh one, point oh oh one, and point oh oh oh one.
We get actually the exact same numbers with the exact same randomness, f of x seems to
be negative point eight three nine one, point eight six two three two, and then point five
six two three eight, and then finally negative point nine five two two.
Now in the first example, coming from the left we started approaching a number, and coming
from the right we started approaching a number, but this time we don't seem to be doing that,
we are not approaching any one value, which actually if we were to graph this function
using a graphing calculator or maybe a great website is Desmos where you can graph it,
this graph kind of goes up and down and then it starts to become really crazy as it gets
next to zero and then it just becomes really crazy.
So it's really hard to see what's happening because it's going crazy, it's not approaching
any one value, so in this case when our table method fails we say the limit as x equals
zero, actually let's do this in red, we will say the limit as x equals zero or x approaches
zero of cosine of one over x equals d and e which is going to be an abbreviation for
does not exist because it's not approaching any one value, it's kind of going all over
the place, we're going to say this limit does not exist.
So our first strategy for finding the limit is what's called the table method, we take
values that are closer and closer to the number we want and see what the function is getting
closer and closer to on both the left and right side.
The second method is what's called the graph method where we can actually look at the
graph and see what y value is the graph approaching.
So let's draw a graph here that we can play with and let's see we're going to put a vertical
asymptote here at two, I'm going to put a point at negative one comma three, I'm going to put
a whole at one comma two but I'm also going to put a point at one comma negative one,
I'm also going to put a point at two comma one and then an open point at two comma negative
one, I'm going to bring the graph down from that two comma negative one starting at the
asymptote, I'm going to come up from the asymptote and then kind of go through my points.
So we got this funky looking graph, a lot of weird things happening but that's okay.
The first question we're going to attempt to answer is to see if we can find the limit
as x approaches negative one of this function.
So as x approaches negative one what we see is the graph is really approaching a y value
of three.
So we will say the limit as x approaches negative one on this graph is three.
What's the limit as x approaches positive one of this graph?
Now it's interesting to note that positive one, this graph clearly is equal to negative
one because that's where the solid dot is.
There is an open dot on the graph which means there's a hole that's not actually there but
with limits we're interested in what actually should be there even if it's missing and you
see the graph coming in from both the left and the right are really getting close to
a height of two.
And so we'll say this graph is getting closer and closer to two as we get closer and closer
to one.
Even though if I were to ask what f of one is, f of one is actually equal to negative
one but it doesn't matter what the point actually is.
What matters is what is the point getting closer and closer to?
One more.
Let's take the limit as x approaches two of f of x.
Now at two this is interesting because at two from the left side, let me see if I can
get rid of some of this red, it's kind of getting in the way.
At two we see from the left side the graph is getting close to one but when we come in
from the right side it seems the graph is getting closer and closer to negative one.
Since those are not the same values, it's not approaching the same value from both sides,
we have to say that this limit does not exist because we're not approaching one value.
We can't say there's one value that should be there because it's really approaching two
different values.
Which kind of sets up the idea that if we're approaching one value on the left and one value
on the right, why don't we call those two different limits?
And that sets up this idea of what we're going to call a one-sided limit.
Where we have this notation of the limit as x approaches some number a and we'll put a
little negative sign like a superscript of f of x and when we see that negative sign,
that negative sign means I'm only interested in coming from the left side, coming from
where all the negatives are on the left side of the graph versus if I want the limit as
x approaches a with a little positive subscript, that positive superscript means I only want
to come from the right side.
So for example, if I have a graph like this, let's say it comes down kind of like x squared
up until we have a gap at one, an empty hole at one, and it's going to drop down to negative
two and become a straight line from there.
So now I can ask, what is the limit as x approaches one?
Even though it approaches two different values at one, if I put a little negative superscript,
that means I'm only interested in coming in from the left side.
And so when I come in from the left side, we see it's approaching positive one, which
is different than if I ask for the limit as x approaches one from the right side of the
function.
Coming in from the right side of the function, it's going down here to a y value of negative
two.
So now we can calculate the limits if we specify if we're coming from the left or the right
side.
Notice however, we still cannot say the limit as x approaches one because these are not
approaching the same value.
From one side it's one, from the other side it's negative two, it does not exist.
In fact it only exists if the left and right are the same.
Now if they happen to both be the same, that's great, then it exists.
But if they're not the same, then it's not going to work.
Let's look at the idea of one-sided limits, not with the graph method, but with the table
method that we did at the beginning of this lecture.
Number two, let's make what's called a piecewise function.
If f of x is equal to, and it's got two parts, it's equal to x minus two if x is less than
one, and it's equal to x squared plus one if x is greater than or equal to one.
So just like before it's got one part on the left and one part on the right, we use one
equation for small values of x, we use another equation for bigger values of x.
So we're going to use a table to find three things.
The limit as x goes to one from the left of f of x, the limit as x goes to one from the
right of f of x, and then we're going to use that to decide if the limit as x goes to one
of f of x actually exists, and if it exists, what is that number?
So let's start with the table on the left side.
We're going to look at values of x from the left of one, which means we want to be a little
bit less than one, so maybe 0.9, getting closer 0.99, getting closer 0.99, and then even closer
0.9999 to see what the f of x equals.
So on our calculator we'll hit y equals, clear out the old equation.
When we're on the left, we're smaller than one, so smaller than one is going to be x
minus two, because x is smaller than one, and we'll hit second table to weed out the
old values, because they aren't doing us any good.
The new values are 0.9, 0.99, 0.999, and 0.499.
And what we see is essentially what we're ending up with is negative 1.1, negative 1.01, negative
1.001, and ultimately pretty much negative one when we round it off.
So what that tells me then is that the limit as x approaches one from the left, using numbers
slightly smaller of f of x, we're approaching or getting closer to negative one.
Now let's look at the right side.
Using x values to the right, slightly higher than one, we might start with 1.1, 1.01, 1.001,
and 1.001, and we're going to see what happens to f of x.
The key here now is I have to go to y equals and delete out my old function, or clear out
my old function, because now that x is bigger than one, we have to use the other equation,
the second equation, which is x squared plus one.
And when we hit second table and clear out the old values, our new values are 1.1, 1.01,
and 1.001, and we see a definite pattern emerging as we fill in our f of x column.
That was 2.21, 2.0201, 2.002, and 2.0002, but we see those are definitely approaching
a clear number, so we can announce that the limit as x approaches one from the right of
f of x using slightly bigger numbers, we're getting closer and closer to two.
So what does it all mean about the limit as x approaches one of f of x overall?
Well because the left and right are approaching different numbers, one's approaching negative
one and one's approaching positive two, these are not the same, so the limit does not exist
purely at one.
Now there is another case that I want to look at of what can happen as you're trying to
make your table, like we're up to E now, what I'm going to call infinite limits.
For example, if I take the limit as x approaches three, we'll go from the left this time of
one over x minus three, didn't need to be in parentheses, but it will be in parentheses
for our calculator anyways, so we're going to look at values for x and see how our f
of x compares.
I set only on the left, so we need a little bit smaller than three, we'll start at two
point nine, then we'll try two point nine nine, two point nine nine, and two point nine
nine nine to get us really, really close.
Hit y equals, clear out the function one divided by in parentheses, so we don't lose our order
of operations, x minus three, close the parentheses, and then we'll head to our table, second table,
clear out these numbers because we're interested in two point nine, two point nine nine, two
point nine nine nine, and two point nine nine nine nine, and there's a clear pattern here,
we go from negative ten to negative a hundred to negative one thousand to negative ten thousand,
so when we're trying to calculate the limit as x goes to three from the left of one over
x minus three, we see it's not necessarily approaching any one number, but it's definitely
going somewhere specifically, it's getting bigger and bigger, or more and more negative
would be a better way to say it, so what I'm going to say is this is actually going to
negative infinity, because as I get closer and closer to three, I'm going to get a more
and more negative number, in fact a similar thing happens if we go to the other side of
the function, let's take the limit as x goes to three from the right of one over x minus
three, and look at various values for x and how f of x compares, from the right we need
to be slightly bigger than three, so we'll start at three point one, get a little closer,
three point oh one, closer three point oh oh one, and closer three point oh oh oh one,
and let's see how this compares on our calculator, same function so I don't have to type it in
again, but for my x values we're going from three point one to three point oh one to three
point oh oh one, whoops got an extra zero, three point oh oh one, and then finally three
point oh oh oh one, and we see the exact same pattern starting to happen here, we've got
ten, one hundred, one thousand, and ten thousand, the only difference is now the graph is not
negative instead it's positive, so the limit as x goes to three from the right of one over
x minus three, it's getting bigger and bigger and positive so we will say it's going to
be positive infinity, so our limits can actually be infinite, positive or negative infinity
if it truly is getting bigger and bigger or negative bigger and bigger without bound,
and what this actually means about the graph, this means the graph has a vertical asymptote
at three, or x equals three would be a better way to say it, in other words if I were to
sketch a graph of this guy really quick and I'll just make a small version of it one,
two, three, at three there's going to be a vertical asymptote and the graph is going
to bend around that vertical asymptote, and so you see when we're approaching from the
left it's going down to negative infinity and when we're approaching three from the
right it goes to positive infinity, before we wrap up here let's do one more problem
where we just find a bunch of limits just to practice, so I'm going to draw a graph
on here, we're going to go four each direction, and at negative three comma three we're going
to put a point and from that point it's going to curve up to the left, we're also at negative
three two going to put an open point, then at negative one comma four we're going to put
an open point, and then at two we're going to put a vertical asymptote, so we're going
to connect the open point to open point is the maximum and then come down to the asymptote,
and then at three comma two we'll put another point and kind of bring the graph down and
into that point, I want to put one more point on this graph at negative one comma one, we
have that open dot at negative one, the closed point means where the point actually is, might
not be where it's supposed to be but that's where it actually is, so I've got nine of
these, I want to see if we can calculate, first we're going to find the limit as x approaches
negative one of f of x, now at negative one what is the graph getting close to, not where
the graph is actually, you'll see from the left and the right the graph is getting closer
and closer to a height of four, so we say the limit at negative one is four because that's
what should be there even if it's not, notice that's different than asking what is f at
negative one, where is f actually at negative one, and at negative one on the curve there's
a hole at negative one, the actual negative one point is at a height of one, how about
this one, the limit as x approaches negative three from the left of f of x, well at negative
three from the left we see this graph is approaching a height of three, we can compare that with
the limit as x approaches negative three from the right of f of x, when we come from the
right or the positive side notice it comes down a bit lower to a height of two, so the
limit there is approaching two, which means if I asked what the limit as x approaches
negative three of f of x is, we can see already from the left and the right we're approaching
two different values, they're not the same, because they're not the same this limit does
not exist, it must be the same to exist, how about the limit as x approaches two from
the left of f of x, as we get closer from the left side to two notice this graph is
going down to a vertical asymptote, because we're going down all the way this is actually
equal to negative infinity, it goes down all the way to infinity before it actually gets
to two because it will never touch that vertical asymptote, similarly the limit as x approaches
two from the right of f of x, looking at the right side we see the graph is going up, up
and up and up without bound or stopping, it's going to be equal to positive infinity, what's
the limit as x approaches three of f of x, now three is right where this point is on the
right side and notice when we come in from the left or the right it's going to that same
height of two, so we'll say the limit is approaching two and what you might also notice is the
point that should be there actually is there, so we can also say that f of three is also
equal to two, and so when the limit and the point are equal to each other that's significant
to us, we say that means the graph is continuous at that point because the limit and the point
are the same, but we're going to spend a whole day on continuity a little bit later, right
now what's important is that you get very comfortable finding limits both from the graph
method and also from the table method, so take a look at some of the assignments in the book
and I look forward to seeing you in class so that we can discuss these limits in more detail.
Today we're going to take a look at the question, how can we evaluate limits?
In our last lesson we looked at how we can use a table or a graph to evaluate a limit
by getting closer and closer to a specific value, what we're going to do today is take
a look at some limit laws that we can use to help us find limits quicker and more accurately.
First there are two basic limit laws.
The first is that the limit as x approaches a of x, since x is a straight line with no
holds or gaps or any funny actions happening on the graph, we can say that that limit is
going to equal whatever number we're checking on the graph.
The second limit is as x approaches a of some constant where c is just any number but there's
no x's in there, then that is going to always approach that constant or c.
These two are our basic limit laws and important that we should be very comfortable calculating
those limits as soon as we see them.
So for example if I ask what is the limit as x goes to negative four of x, we should
know right away that's going to equal the number or the negative four.
Similarly if I want to know what the limit is as x approaches seven of two, two is just
a number or a constant.
This function is always equal to two regardless of what x is, so even at seven x is still
or the function is still equal to two.
In addition to the basic limit laws, there are six other properties of limits or limit
laws that we should be comfortable working with.
We'll list all six here and then we'll look at some examples of how these limit laws can
be worked out.
First is the sum or difference as they both work the same.
And the idea here is if we take the limit as x approaches some number a of two parts
that are added together, maybe f of x plus g of x, that is actually the same as if we
took the limits of the two parts individually, the limit as x approaches a of the f of x,
and added the limit as x approaches a of g of x.
If we take the two parts individually, we'll get the same result and it works for subtraction
also, so I'm going to change this to plus or minus.
The next limit law is what we call the constant multiplier, where we're going to take the
limit as x approaches a of some constant times something with x in it.
The way we can work here is that constant actually is multiplied by whatever the limit
as x approaches a of that function actually is.
We also have the product rule, which says if I want the limit as x approaches a of f
of x times g of x, two things multiplied together, we can actually take the limits of the two
parts, the limit as x approaches a of the first part, times the limit as x approaches
a of the second part, or the g of x.
Same idea works for a quotient, because really multiplication and division are just inverse
reciprocals of each other, so limit as x approaches a of f of x divided by g of x, that is equal
to the limit as x approaches a of f of x divided by the limit as x approaches a of g of x.
We also have what's called the power rule.
The power rule says if I'm interested in finding a limit as x approaches a of some function
that is raised to some type of exponent, we can find the limit first and then raise the
answer to some exponent, and because exponents and radicals are really the same thing, we
can extend this to number six, what we call the radical rule, which is that the limit
as x approaches a of the square root of some function is equal to the square root of the
limit, so I'm going to highlight all six of these limit laws as important limit laws that
we know and understand, but this is a case, as is often the case with calculus, is it's
more important that we understand how to use the six rules than it is that we can actually
quote the six rules from memory, because if we understand the process of what we're doing,
we just have to straight out solve the problems instead of going through memorizing a whole
bunch of formulas, which should not be the goal in any calculus class.
Basically what we're saying here is that we can take the limits of the pieces we can,
and we can add and subtract them, we've got constant multipliers, limit pieces can be
multiplied, divided, exponents, radicals, we can just take the limits of the individual
pieces.
Maybe it's easier to explain with some examples.
If we want the limit as x approaches two of x squared minus three x plus four.
We know from our limit laws that this added and subtracted can be broken into three pieces.
We also know that the exponents and constants can be pulled outside of the limit, so what
this really means we can do is we can take the limit as x approaches two of the x and
then square it minus three times the limit as x approaches two of the x and add four.
We add the limit as x approaches two of the four.
We have the two basic limit laws that says the limit of x is the number and that the
limit of a constant is equal to the constant.
If we plug that in, the limit as x approaches two of x becomes two squared minus three times
the limit as x approaches two of x is just two plus four.
I can plug this into my calculator and we'll end up with two.
Let's try another one.
The limit as x approaches negative one of the square root of x plus five.
Limits go through exponents, radicals, pluses, minuses, fractions, so what we really can
say is this is the square root of the limit as x goes to negative one of x plus the limit
as x goes to negative one of five.
We know the limit of x is the number, the limit of a constant is the constant.
This is the square root of negative one plus five, which is the square root of four or
also two.
What you might notice here is instead of doing all the work of putting that limit through
all the pieces, what we're really doing is whenever possible, we're taking the number
we're working with and plugging it in to the x.
In summary, what we're really doing is what's called direct substitution.
In other words, if I had an example like the limit as x approaches one of x squared minus
four over x squared plus two x plus one, what that really means is we can put the one in
for the x to see what's happening around one.
If I put the one in, we get one squared minus four over one squared plus two times one plus
one.
One minus four is negative three and one plus two plus one is four and so the limit as x
approaches one is negative three-fourths.
In summary, the easiest way we can calculate a limit is to directly plug that number into
the function.
However, that doesn't always work perfectly.
We've got a couple techniques to handle what we do if direct substitution doesn't quite
work.
First let's call this additional techniques that we will use when substitution does not
First we're going to find the limit as x approaches negative three of x squared plus four x plus
three over two x squared plus five x minus three.
What I want to notice is when we plug negative three in, especially interested in the denominator,
we get two times nine minus fifteen minus three which is zero.
What we're noticing is substitution divides by zero.
We can't divide by zero.
We can't have zero in the denominator.
We need an additional technique.
Our additional technique is going to be to factor and reduce.
Hopefully when we do this, we'll be able to actually take the limit through direct substitution.
We're going to take the limit as x goes to negative three.
The numerator factors nicely.
X squared is x times x.
Three is three times one.
Both positive gives us four x in the middle.
In the denominator, two x squared is two x times x.
Three is three times one.
Is that the right order?
Six and one.
If we do plus six and a minus one, it will work.
What's really nice there is now you see that x plus three reduces out.
We're left with the limit as x goes to negative three of x plus one over two x minus one.
Now direct substitution works great because no longer does our denominator equal zero.
We're no longer dividing by zero.
Instead, we have negative three plus one over two times negative three minus one, which
is negative two over negative seven, and a negative divided by a negative is a positive.
For our final answer, this limit equals two sevenths.
Our first technique, if we're dividing by zero, we can factor and hopefully reduce
out the part that equals zero.
Here's a second problem.
The limit as x goes to eight of the square root of x plus one minus three over x minus
eight.
Again, we have the same note.
If we substitute in the denominator, eight minus eight will be zero.
Substitution divides by zero.
We can't do that.
We need another trick.
This time we can't factor because there's a radical in there.
However, there's a trick that we use with radicals.
If radicals are getting inconvenient, we'll get rid of the radicals by multiplying by
the conjugate.
This is similar to what we did in pre-calculus and algebra.
When we were rationalizing the denominator, we multiplied by the conjugate.
This time we're going to rationalize the numerator and see if that helps us.
We'll change the sign in the middle.
Everything else is the same.
The square root of x plus one and three is the same, but instead of subtracting, we're
going to add the numerator and the denominator.
When we do that, the numerator becomes nice, limit as x goes to eight still.
Because these are conjugates, a sum and a difference, the first part is squared.
When we square a square root, we just get the inside stuff, x plus one.
Then it's always a minus, and then we square the last part, three squared is nine.
Over, let's keep the denominator factored.
X minus eight times the square root of x plus one plus three.
That's nice because in the numerator, we can simplify and notice one minus nine is x minus
eight.
We still have the same denominator.
Don't need to multiply that out because we want to stay factored so we can divide out
that x minus eight.
Remember if everything divides out, there's still a one up there that doesn't disappear.
Now we're taking the limit as x goes to eight of one over the square root of x plus one
plus three.
Now we can plug our number in because the denominator no longer will equal zero.
We have one over the square root, plugging eight in, eight plus one plus three equals
one over the square root of nine is three plus three is sixth.
We now know our limit is one sixth.
Another example, let's find the limit as x approaches three of one over x plus two minus
one over five all over x minus three.
Again we have the same notes, the same problem.
Substitution means we're dividing by zero, we can't divide by zero.
However we've dealt with complex fractions, fractions and fractions before.
We multiply top and bottom by the least common denominator which in this case is a five and
an x plus two.
So we'll multiply by five x plus two and just distribute it through five x plus two and
the denominator also by five x plus two.
When we do that the x plus twos and the fives divide out, be careful with the negative,
it's going to have to distribute through the parentheses, don't get in trouble with that
negative.
Get us some more whiteboard space.
So now we have the limit as x goes to three of five minus x minus two distributing the
negative all the way through all over x minus three times five times x plus two.
Line up by combining like terms in the numerator, the limit as x goes to three of three minus
x over x minus three times five times x plus two.
We've got our subtraction backwards with the three minus x and the x minus three but that's
okay because if we remember from pre-calc those can reduce out if there's a negative
one left behind, the negative one swaps the order of the subtraction.
So now we have the limit as x goes to three of negative one over five times x plus two.
Now we can do direct substitution because no longer are we dividing by zero.
So negative one over five times three plus two which is negative one over five times five
or twenty-five.
So there's three tricks here and these three tricks are going to come back again when we're
talking about derivatives so it's good to take a moment to go over what we just did.
The first trick we did is we can find a limit by factoring and reducing.
We also can get rid of radicals by multiplying by conjugates and we also can get rid of complex
fractions by multiplying top and bottom by the LCD.
Three tricks that are going to be very useful to us so that we can use that direct substitution
in order to find a limit.
So we're talking about finding limits though, I want to go back to the discussion we had
about the two-sided limits and how we can handle those.
If you remember in our previous lesson we talked about coming in from the left and coming
in from the right.
So for a two-sided limits the left and the right must be equal.
So if we're working with a piecewise function like f of x is equal to x plus three if x
is greater than negative three and it's equal to x squared if x is less than or equal to
negative three, we need to consider at negative three what's happening on the left and the
right.
So first let's look at the limit as x approaches negative three from the left of f of x.
From the left we're dealing with smaller values of negative three, smaller values less than
or equal to three is x squared.
So we'll directly plug in the negative three into the x squared or negative three squared
which is nine.
Let's compare that with the limit as x approaches negative three from the right of f of x.
And from the right we're talking about bigger values or x is greater than negative three.
So that's the x plus three direct substitution, negative three plus three is equal to zero
and what you'll notice is those two limits are not the same.
So what does that mean about the limit as x approaches three of f of x?
Well we know it does not exist.
Let's do one more example of a two-sided limit with a piecewise function.
Let's look at f of x equals two x if x is less than two and x squared if x is greater
than or equal to two.
So what's the limit at two?
Well we've got to come in from each side.
The limit as x approaches two from the left of f of x, from the left those are the smaller
values where x is less than two.
So let's plug in two.
Two times two is equal to four.
Looking at the other side the limit as x approaches two from the right of f of x, coming from
the right means we want bigger values or when x is greater than or equal to two.
So we'll plug it into x squared.
Two squared is equal to four.
This time you notice we have the same value for both the left and the right-sided limits.
When we have the same value then we can say the limit as x approaches two of f of x still
does exist.
In fact that limit is four.
Whatever is the same on both the left and the right side.
So the important thing with piecewise functions is we have to be equal to the same number
on both sides of the function.
With our limit discussion we talked a bit about infinite limits.
So let's look at how we can work with infinite limits, calculating them with this whole
idea of substitution.
With infinite limits there are two properties that will help us calculate the infinite limits.
First property is that the limit as x approaches a from the left of one over x minus a.
And for coming in from the left on this guide this function will always go to negative infinity.
Because all the pieces are positive it's going to go down to negative infinity.
Similarly as x approaches a from the right of one over x minus a, coming in from the
right we're going to go up to positive infinity.
These two limits are going to be the key to finding infinite limits by hand rather than
going through the table method or the graph method.
Let's first look at the limit as x approaches two from the left of x plus one over x squared
minus four.
We can't directly plug two in because it makes it undefined so we would start to factor
to see if that helps us to see if we can remove the discontinuity.
So x plus one over x squared minus four is x plus two times x minus two but the frustrating
part there is that x minus two doesn't divide out so we can't divide out the bad part.
So what we'll do is we'll isolate the bad part in a separate fraction one over the bad
part.
This is going to give us the limit as x approaches two from the left of x plus one over x plus
two times one over x minus two.
Now we can do direct substitution on the good part and for the bad part that's been isolated
we're coming in from the left and we know when we come in from the left that's going
to go to a negative infinity.
So let's look at each of these pieces.
In two-in we've got two plus one over two plus two times the negative infinity.
Well two plus one is three, two plus two is four times the negative infinity.
The answer here is going to be infinity but what we have to decide is we've got a positive
times a negative is going to equal a negative and so we end up with this function going
out to negative infinity.
Let's do that one more time where we isolate the bad part.
Let's come in from the other direction.
Let's take the limit as x goes to two from the right of the x plus one over x squared
minus four.
And again we start out the same as x going to two from the right by factoring the denominator
to x plus two x minus two and then isolating the bad part as a fraction one over that and
so we end up with the limit as x goes to two from the right of x plus one over x plus
two times the bad part of one over x minus two.
This time we're going in from the plus or positive side that's the second property that's
now going to go to a positive infinity.
So when we make our substitution step we're going to plug positive infinity in for that
second part.
Plugging two in we have two plus one over two plus two times positive infinity which is three
fourths times positive infinity.
A positive times a positive is positive.
This graph is going to positive infinity from the right.
I have one more limit trick that I want to look at.
We call this guy the squeeze theorem and it's particularly useful to find limits with trig
properties.
The idea with the squeeze theorem is if I've got some function and I don't know what the
limit is but I can find a function that goes above it and a function that goes below it
so that they all meet in the center at the same exact point.
So we've got one that's always above, one that's always below, but they all meet together
in the same point.
At that same point they will all have the same limit.
If they all meet at the same point.
My picture doesn't show them meeting at the same point really well but the idea is the
top one, the bottom one, and the middle function all converge together at that same point in
the center.
Then they all have the same exact limit.
Let me show you what this looks like.
Let's say we want to know the limit as x goes to zero of x squared times the cosine of x.
We don't have a limit rule yet that says we can just plug the number into the cosine just
into polynomials, into fractions, into multiplication, into radicals, but not into cosine so we need
to use the squeeze theorem to get at it.
How the squeeze theorem works is we're going to look particularly at the cosine and say
one thing we know about the cosine, not the sine, the cosine.
The cosine of x has a very bounded domain.
It's always between a negative one and a positive one.
Same thing for the sine.
So what we want to do is manipulate this inequality so that it looks like the entire function
x squared times the cosine.
Well the center is just missing a multiply by x squared.
So if we do that on all three parts, we end up with negative x squared is less than or
equal to x squared cosine x, which is less than or equal to x squared.
We can take the limit of each of these parts, the limit as x goes to zero of negative x
squared is less than or equal to the limit as x goes to zero of x squared cosine x, which
is less than or equal to the limit as x goes to zero of x squared.
And what's nice about this is the left and the right we can do direct substitution on.
If I plug in zero we get negative zero squared, which is just zero, is less than or equal
to the limit as x goes to zero of x squared cosine x, which is less than or equal to here
we have a polynomial.
Direct substitution we plug zero in, zero squared is just zero.
So if the limit is less than zero and greater than zero or equal to it must be equal to
zero.
So the limit as x goes to zero of x squared cosine x is equal to zero because it's been
squeezed in between these other two functions that both go to zero.
They all are at the same point, they all have the same limit.
One is always below and one is always above.
So that wraps up our discussion of all of the limit tricks.
The basic idea is direct substitution.
We want to plug the number that we have for the limit into the function and simplify.
We have a couple tricks we did if that doesn't work to get it to a point that it does work.
But ultimately if we can plug the number in it's very easy to take the limit.
Working with limits leads us directly into an important conversation around the topic
of continuity.
So we're going to answer the question when is a function continuous?
Well in order to determine when the function is or is not continuous we need to know what
continuous means.
First kind of an informal definition.
The idea of continuous means basically I can draw the graph without lifting my pencil.
It's just a continuous curve without lifting the pencil for a gap or a jump or an asymptote.
It's just continuous.
Now a more formal mathematical definition states that a continuous function will satisfy
three conditions for all points and we'll call those points A.
The first condition is that F of A is defined.
So the function can't be undefined at the given point.
In addition we need the limit as X approaches A of F of X to exist.
So for example if the function is approaching two different numbers from two different sides
the limit does not exist.
But the all important one that we probably go to to check the most for continuity is
that the limit as X approaches A of F of X is actually equal to whatever F of A is.
In other words we can do the direct substitution to calculate the limit because the limit is
equal to the point itself.
These three definitions and specifically this last one being the most important are what
makes a function continuous.
So what does it mean to be discontinuous or not a continuous function?
Well there are actually three types of discontinuity which means not continuous.
The first type of discontinuity is what we call a removable discontinuity.
And here's what a removable discontinuity looks like.
It's something like F of X equals X squared plus X minus 12 over X minus 3.
Notice if we tried to calculate F of 3 or just directly substitute the 3 in we would
get 3 squared plus 3 minus 12 which is 0 divided by, the important part, 3 minus 3 is 0 and
we can't divide by 0.
So F of X or F of A, F of 3 is undefined.
However if I took my function and I factored it, we'd get what, 4 and 3 plus 4 and minus
3 over X minus 3, we can then divide out the X minus 3 and we've removed the discontinuity
or the problem.
Now because we've been able to remove the discontinuity we could calculate the limit.
So this is a removable discontinuity because we were able to algebraically remove the part
that was discontinuous.
Now the way this looks on a graph, and we'll go ahead and just graph this same function,
not to scale here, so we'll come up and call this 4 here.
But the idea is this graph is going to go through 4 and it's going to have a hole that's
been removed right at 3 that it goes around.
We can't graph this without lifting our pencil because we have to lift our pencil at the
hole in the graph.
So we could say that the hole in the graph is removable.
It is a removable discontinuity.
The first type of discontinuity.
The second type of discontinuity that we're going to look at is called an infinite discontinuity.
And the example we're going to use here is f of x is equal to x minus 3 over x plus 1.
We would end up with a vertical asymptote at 1.
And there's actually also a horizontal asymptote at 1.
So this graph looks like this, no it doesn't, it looks like this.
But specifically what we find is the infinite discontinuity.
So that is our second type of discontinuity.
The third type of discontinuity is what we call a jump discontinuity.
And it does exactly what you'd expect the graph to do, it jumps.
So if we have f of x equals the piecewise function x squared minus 1 for x less than
1 and x plus 1 for x greater than or equal to 1, what we're going to find is the limit
again is not going to exist.
Because if we take the limit as x goes to 1 from the left, or smaller values, we use
the first equation.
So we'll directly substitute 1 into x squared minus 1, and we get 1 squared minus 1, which
is 0.
And we compare that to the limit coming in from the right of 1.
Well coming in from the right we want the bigger values.
So we'll plug it into x plus 1 or 1 plus 1, which is 2.
And because these are not the same, we have a jump in the graph.
And the limit as x approaches 1 again does not exist.
What does this look like as a graph?
Looks like you'd expect it to.
It's x squared minus 1, so it's going to come down.
And then we've got a jump at 1, and then it turns into the line.
That's specifically what we're interested in is the graph jumps.
So again the whole idea of discontinuity versus continuity is can you draw the graph without
lifting your pencil?
Specifically does the function at a equal to limit as x approaches a?
Kind of a corollary that comes out of this idea of continuity is this idea of what we
call the intermediate value theorem, which is often abbreviated with the first letters
IVT, intermediate value theorem.
And what the intermediate value theorem says is that if a function f of x is continuous,
if the function always equals its limit on some interval from a to b, and there's another
number z that's between f of a and f of b, then there exists another number, we'll call
it c, that is NAB such that f of c will equal that z.
Okay that definition is really weird.
Let's draw a picture that really illustrates what this means.
I've got a graph, we're going to go from a to c, a to b, sorry.
So the graph goes from a to b.
Say a is down low, b is up high, and it might do something interesting and crazy, but it's
continuous so I can draw it without lifting my pencil and go all the way from a to b.
Well a hits at f of a and b hits up on top at f of b.
The idea of the intermediate value theorem is I can pick any z that is between f of a
and f of b, any z I want.
And wherever I pick that z, there is a guarantee that there will be a solution, some c that
will get me that solution.
In fact there could be more than one solution, if I pick a z kind of down towards the center
you see there's three solutions in there.
But there's always at least one solution for any z that's in the middle of those.
Basically we're going to hit every single value all the way up from f of a to f of b
because there's no other way to connect the dots.
Now there's a couple of cautions about what this theorem actually says.
So before we get to an example of how to use it, I want to make sure we clearly understand
what this is actually saying.
First the definition started out that if f is continuous.
This does not work if f is not continuous.
But it could.
We just don't have the guarantee that we get from continuity.
So drawing a picture of what I mean by that.
Here we've got a, here we've got b.
So there's a point at a and there's a point at b.
So we've got f of b and f of a.
The intermediate value theorem says that I can pick any z in between f of a and f of
b, as long as it's continuous.
But if this function just kind of goes like this, and then there's a jump discontinuity
and it goes like that, notice if I pick a z right in the middle of that jump discontinuity
I do not get a solution.
I could if I picked a z up high enough that it actually hit the graph.
I could get a result, but I'm not guaranteed a result because of that jump discontinuity.
So it does not work if f is not continuous.
The other important thing is it does not work if z is outside of f of a and f of b.
But it could.
Again it could work.
We just don't have that guarantee.
So again we're going to go from a to b, a's here, b's here, which means f of a is at the
lower point where a is, f of b at the higher point.
And if f of a is connected somehow, but my z is too low or too high, I'm not guaranteed
that it's going to work, that I'm going to cross the graph.
It doesn't necessarily mean no though because if the graph did go up and down and really
wiggle it could go down and hit z.
But I don't have any guarantee that it does.
So it's really important for the intermediate value theorem that z has to be between the
two y values.
The one other thing this tells us, this theorem only tells us there is at least one solution.
There may or may not be more.
And I kind of hinted at this with my original drawing.
But again we've got a and we've got b, put a down low and b up high and the graph is
going to wiggle, but specifically f of a aligns with a and f of b aligns with b.
And if I pick z in the middle of this graph, what you'll see is I actually get one, two,
three solutions.
So there's actually three points that work that could be our c.
We are guaranteed with the intermediate value theorem that there is at least one solution
for z.
There could be more, but we have no way of knowing if there is or is not more.
So that's really what this intermediate value theorem is trying to say is if f of x is continuous
and our z is somewhere between those y values of f of a and f of b, then there exists at
least one c such that when we plug c into the function we get z for a solution.
How do we use this?
Well here's how we use this.
We use this to show that we do have solutions to functions even if we can't solve them.
We can show that zero equals one over x plus sine x has at least one solution.
We know this function is continuous except at zero.
So we're going to stay away from zero so that we're continuous between our a and our b.
In order to show that it has one solution, what we're going to attempt to do, a solution
happens at zero it says, what we're going to attempt to do is find the point where the
graph crosses zero.
Notice before zero the graph is negative.
After zero this graph is positive.
Zero is going to be between negative and positive.
So if I can show that there is a solution that's negative and that this guy has a solution
that's positive, everything between it including zero must exist.
One thing we know about sine is where is sine positive?
We're going to add sine of x.
Sine is the y-coordinate on the unit circle, so I imagine my unit circle.
The y-coordinate is positive, so let's make a note of what we're doing here.
We need to find a negative and positive solution or better than saying solution let's say output
four f of x and then zero between it must exist as an output.
So on the unit circle sine, sine is the y-coordinate.
The y-coordinate I notice is very positive up here on top, that's at pi over two and
it's also very negative down here at the bottom at three pi over two.
Let's see what those give us when we plug them in.
So let's find f of pi over two which is equal to one over pi over two plus the sine of pi
over two.
One over pi over two that's the reciprocal, so we have two over pi plus the sine of pi
over two is one.
That's definitely positive, actually if I put it in my calculator I get 1.64 or so.
Then the other point to try and get negative, we said the most negative point for sine is
at three pi over two.
So let's see what that gives us.
One over three pi over two plus the sine of three pi over two is equal to one of the reciprocal
of three pi over two is two over three pi plus the sine of three pi over two is negative
one.
Sure enough that's negative point seven eight eight.
Therefore, by the way these three triangles, these three dots in a triangle that means
therefore, it's a nice shorthand for mathematicians.
Therefore we know that all outputs between 1.64 and negative point seven eight eight are
possible.
Probably they're possible when x is between three pi over two and pi over two.
Therefore zero, which is between those values, is a solution.
The intermediate value theorem tells us that there has to be a result in output between
1.64 and negative point seven eight eight.
Therefore zero is a solution.
That's a quick look at continuity and the intermediate value theorem.
Take a look at some of the problems in your book to practice this a bit, but I'll look
forward to seeing you in class so we can talk about continuity a little bit more.
Thus far in our studies of limit, we have kind of been waving our hands over the definition
of a limit and talking more generally about the definition rather than the precise definition.
That's what we're going to take a look at today.
The question is what is the precise definition of a limit?
First we're going to look at the definition and then we'll take a look at the meat of
this lesson, which is how do we show that a value actually is the limit of some type
of function.
First graphically to get an idea of what we're going to be talking about here, let's say
we've got some graph, maybe it curves up like this.
We want to know what is the limit of f of x as x approaches some number, actually let's
call it a not c as x approaches a of f of x.
The way we actually define the derivative is we're going to move from a out a little
bit each direction because remember our limit, we need both sides.
That little tiny change that we move, we call delta.
We add delta and we subtract delta to get to two more spots.
The idea is if I go up to the point on the graph, what I can do is I can box in the actual
point on the graph within that range.
The point on the graph in green here where a actually hits or where a should be, it might
not actually be there.
We're going to call that l the limit.
The idea is that the deltas will box it in within some epsilon above or epsilon below.
The challenge that we're going to have is to find the connection between the delta that
we move left and right on the bottom and the epsilon that we move up and down from the
right.
The idea is if we zoom in and zoom in and zoom in and get closer and closer to the actual
point, we'll continue to be boxed in around some epsilon.
That box is what allows us to not actually have a point there because we just have to
be around the point.
Basically infinitely close to the point but not actually at the point, what are we at?
For every epsilon, we need to be able to find a delta.
This is what gives rise to, in words, the precise definition for the limit.
We say that for all epsilon, greater than zero, that there exists a delta greater than
zero, another Greek letter, such that if the absolute value of x minus a is less than delta,
remember a is that x-coordinate that we want to find the limit at, then the absolute value,
we do absolute value because we can do plus or minus, the absolute value of f of x minus
l is less than epsilon.
In other words, on the right side, we're within an epsilon of the actual limit.
Because mathematicians like to show off and make things more complicated than they really
are, we actually can represent this entire definition symbolically.
This is a neat party trick is to just be able to write down really quick the precise definition
of a limit without writing a single word.
Here is symbolically the precise definition of a limit.
This is a thing of beauty.
The limit as x approaches a of f of x equals l implies that for all epsilon greater than
zero, there exists a delta greater than zero such that the absolute value of x minus a
is less than delta implies that the absolute value of f of x minus the limit is less than
epsilon.
So a great party trick is the precise definition of a limit.
I enjoy putting this on the test for extra credit, but it is quite fancy looking.
What we really want to be able to do with this definition, though, is actually be able
to take a limit and say, hey, if this is the limit, I can prove it's actually the limit
by identifying this relationship between epsilon and delta.
We call these our epsilon delta proofs, and every single proof looks identical.
And so to help you set up your proofs, I'm going to show you the structure of the proof
that the limit as x approaches a of f of x equals l.
We're going to do four steps, and three of the four steps are really scripted, and the
fourth one is just a little bit of algebra that's actually quite easy.
The first step is you're always going to say, we let epsilon be greater than zero.
That has to be true, and that's always the same.
Every proof, let epsilon be greater than zero.
Then you'll say, choose a delta that is equal to something, and actually we're going to
find this later.
I should do that in a different color because it's not actually part of the proof.
Usually that something is going to have the epsilon in it because it's going to show the
relationship between epsilon and delta.
Just leave it blank temporarily because the next thing you do is you assume the absolute
value of x minus a is less than the delta.
Then you say the absolute value of f of x minus the limit is equal to, and then you
do some algebra.
After some algebra, you're going to ultimately say that's less than something, which is going
to require you to do some more algebra.
That will ultimately equal epsilon.
Move that arrow so it's a little nicer.
Maybe make it blue.
Every single proof is going to look exactly the same.
The only place where you actually have to do any work is in this dot, dot, dot.
While you do that dot, dot, dot of algebra, it's going to tell you what you're ultimately
going to put in back in step number two for that delta.
Three steps one, two, and three, we usually throw out on one line because they are so
straightforward.
Let's do a couple examples.
I've got four examples of proofs, and then you can practice some on your own.
First let's do some linear examples.
Just kind of as a tip, if we're dealing with a linear equation like y equals mx plus b,
with linear examples, the delta is generally equal to epsilon divided by something.
You have to figure out what that something is.
Following that same structure, first we're going to prove that the limit as x approaches
three of four x minus seven equals five.
Notice that three is the a, what x is approaching, five is the limit or l, and the four x minus
seven, that's the function.
So here's our proof.
We always say let epsilon be greater than zero.
Choose a delta that's equal to something, we'll leave that blank, and then we will assume
the absolute value of x minus a, a is what the limit is approaching, is less than delta.
That part's really scripted, the only gap is we don't know what delta equals yet.
We're going to go back and fill that in in a minute.
Now we're going to take the absolute value of f of x minus l, let's put f of x in there
actually, f of x is the function, four x minus seven, and then subtract the limit, which
is five, and now we're going to play with this and do some algebra.
What you might see immediately is we can combine like terms on the seven and the five, so we
have the absolute value of four x minus twelve, and then what we ultimately want to do is
we want to find some absolute value of x minus three, so we can use what we assumed.
What you might see here is all we have to do is factor out the four, and we get the
absolute value of x minus three.
We know that the absolute value of x minus three is less than delta, so we're ready
to do our less than statement.
It's less than four times the absolute value, which is less than delta.
This is where we know now what we want delta to be, because what we ultimately want to
do is when we multiply by four, all that's left is epsilon, so delta then is going to
be the reciprocal of what we're multiplying by.
The reciprocal of four is one over four, so delta is equal to epsilon over four, and we
stick that into the first line.
That might not be very clear, but it becomes clear why that's useful in the very next step,
because now we have four times delta is equal to epsilon over four, and now the fours divide
out leaving just the epsilon.
If we're able to simplify the f of x minus l and say it is less than epsilon, we have
proven that this limit is actually equal to what we said it was equal to.
When we're done with the proof, there's a couple ways we show that we're done in mathematics.
The most common way is we write at the end QED.
That's Latin for queterum dimestratum, that was what we wished to show.
Another thing I see a lot of times is people put a little box and color it in, as if to
check off that it's done.
Another thing I've seen is W to the fifth, which stands for which was what we wanted.
Now acknowledge though that you've gotten to the end of the proof, QED is really nice
because it looks like you know Latin and it looks smart.
Let's do one more linear example so that we can see kind of how another similar problem
works, but every problem kind of has the same general setup.
For this example we're going to prove that the limit as x goes to negative one of x squared
plus four x plus three over x plus one is equal to two.
Like before, identifying the pieces, what x is approaching, that's my A, what's inside
the limit, that's the function, and the answer, that's my limit L.
The first line is pretty scripted of every delta epsilon proof.
We let epsilon be greater than zero.
We choose a delta that's equal to something, leave some space, we'll come back, it's going
to be the reciprocal of whatever we're multiplying delta by with an epsilon in the numerator.
Then we will assume the absolute value of x minus A, which is negative one, minus the
negative ones, the same as plus one, is less than delta.
Now the next line is where we do our algebra.
We take the absolute value of the function, which is x squared plus four x plus three
over x plus one, and subtract the limit of two, and hopefully after massaging it a bit
we end up saying this is less than epsilon.
With rational expressions, we're really comfortable with factoring to reduce, so when we factor
we get x plus three times x plus one over the x plus one, and we still have the minus
two at the end.
This is really nice because the x plus ones divide out, which leaves us with the absolute
value of x plus three minus two.
I'm going to run out of space on my next statement, so let's go ahead and use the next line and
say equals the absolute value combining like terms of x plus one.
This is actually really nice because this already is the part that's less than delta.
This time we don't have to factor anything out.
Just to keep things consistent though, I'm going to factor out a one, and say that's
one times the absolute value, because we know that delta has to be the reciprocal of that
number times epsilon.
The reciprocal of one is just one, so we have epsilon over one, or just epsilon.
Delta equals epsilon, because now I know that the x plus one is less than one.
That's from my assume statement.
X plus one is less than the delta, and we know that the delta is equal to the epsilon,
which is what we defined at the beginning, and QED, we have proven that this limit equals
two.
Linear examples, our general strategy as we work through the steps is to make delta equal
to the reciprocal of whatever is multiplied by delta.
But we can also do quadratic examples pretty nicely.
Let's do a couple of those quadratic examples.
With quadratics, what we're going to have to do is we're going to need a little bit
of help to make delta come out right, and so we're going to actually give delta two
options.
Delta is always going to be equal to the minimum of one, and epsilon divided by something.
We need that one to kind of set up what the divided by something is, and I'll show you
in just a minute, but with quadratics, when you see x squared, delta is going to be the
minimum of one and the reciprocal, again, of what's being multiplied by delta.
So let's see if we can prove that the limit as x approaches two of x squared minus three
x is equal to negative two.
Again, x is approaching our a value, the function is what's inside the limit, and l, the limit
is the answer, and we start filling in our proof structure.
First we let epsilon be greater than zero, then we choose a delta that's going to be
equal to something we don't know yet, but we know with quadratics we have to do the
minimum of one and something.
We don't know what the something is yet, and then we will assume that the absolute value
of x minus two, or our a that x is approaching, is less than delta.
Then we go to that absolute value statement.
The absolute value of our function, x squared minus three x, minus the limit, minus the
negative two, means plus two, and hopefully we'll work this down and ultimately say it's
less than an epsilon.
With quadratics we're probably very familiar with factoring.
With absolute value we just keep the absolute values around each factor, so x squared is
x times x, and if we do a minus two and a minus one, we're completely factored.
What's nice here is that we've got the x minus two that we know is less than delta.
So we're going to be able to say this is less than something times delta, but we need to
know what to do with the x minus one bit.
This is where it's going to take a little creativeness.
How we're going to get to that creativeness is we're going to play with the algebra on
x minus two is less than delta, and the fact that we said delta's going to be at most one.
It's the minimum of one and something else.
Let's see, we're going to play off to the side here, I guess I'll put it underneath.
The absolute value of x minus two is less than delta, but delta's no bigger than one.
If the absolute value is less than a number, what that really means is that the x minus
two is between negative one and positive one.
We want to know what to do with the x minus one, so we're going to try and change this
middle stuff to become x minus one. To get x minus two to become x minus one, we're going
to add one. Of course, if we add one there, we have to add one to all three parts. When
we do, we get zero is less than x minus one, which is less than two.
Now, we're going to change this back to an absolute value statement that the absolute
value of x minus one is less than something. We can either say the absolute value is less
than zero or less than two. We always will take the most extreme value because we want
to be less than. We want to keep epsilon as small as possible, so we'll take the worst
case scenario and say, worst case scenario, the two is more extreme. The worst case scenario,
the absolute value of x minus one is less than two. That is what we're going to multiply
delta by. x minus one, worst case scenario is two. x minus two, worst case scenario is
delta. At least, we know that the absolute value of x minus two times x minus one is
less than two times delta. Now, we know what to do with the epsilon. Epsilon divided by
two, the reciprocal of the two, because it's multiplied by delta, to make the rest of the
proof work. We have two times delta, which is epsilon over two. Two's divide out and
we're just left with epsilon. We're done because we've said that the function minus
the limit is less than epsilon. We can now say we're done. QED. I'm probably pronouncing
that wrong, but you don't know Latin, so you can't prove me wrong. Let's do one more quadratic
because these take a little bit more trying to manipulate that second factor in order
to figure out what our delta is going to equal. Let's prove that the limit as x approaches
negative one of two x squared minus x plus one is equal to four. Again, identifying the
pieces, x is approaching our A. The function is what we're taking the limit of and the
answer that is L, our limit. The first three statements of our proof are pretty prescribed
to us. Let epsilon be greater than zero. We will choose a delta that's equal to, we don't
know exactly what it equals yet, but we do know because this is a quadratic, we're going
to do the minimum of one and something, the reciprocal of whatever delta is multiplied
by. Then we assume the absolute value of x minus our A, or what x is approaching, minus
negative one means plus one is less than delta. Now, our algebraic statement is that the
step, the function, two x squared minus x plus one minus the limit of four, a little
bit of cleanup, the absolute value of two x squared minus x minus three. Hopefully,
we can work with this and say it is ultimately less than epsilon. Well, we know we can factor
it, two x and x. To kind of help my factoring, I know I'm ultimately going to try and get
an x plus one. Hopefully, that x is an x plus one, which means the other one is probably
a minus three. When I check that out, it does work. Plus two minus three is the minus one.
Nice, that's what we wanted. Now, we have the x plus one that we like. We know that's
less than delta, but we have to figure out what delta is multiplied by. We need to play
with the two x minus three. Using what we assume, so kind of off to the side in our
work, we assumed, going back to that assumption statement, we assume that x plus one is less
than delta, which worst case scenario, it's going to be a one, the absolute value. We
remove the absolute values by saying that's between positive one and negative one. Then,
we want to massage this so that it looks like two x minus three, so we can figure out how
extreme our situation is. I recommend doing the two x part first. We get it to equal
two x by multiplying by two on all three parts. Make sure we distribute, so we get negative
two is less than two x plus two, which is less than two. Bias number white board space.
We want it to have a minus three, two x minus three. Right now, it's plus two. To get that
to be minus three, we need to subtract five. Two minus five will be the minus three. We
subtract five from all three parts, and we get negative seven is less than two x minus
three, which is less than negative three. Changing it back to an absolute value expression, two
x minus three is less than, and then we pick the most extreme case, so we're always ready
for a worst case scenario. This time, the most extreme case is on the right side, seven
being more extreme than the three, and positive because we're talking about absolute value.
So two x minus three is less than seven. That is what is being multiplied by our delta,
which also tells us the reciprocal means divide by seven, so our delta is epsilon over seven.
So we have seven times delta, which is epsilon over seven. The sevens divide out, and we're
just left with epsilon. So we've shown that f of x minus l is less than epsilon, which
QED is what we wanted, that which was to be demonstrated.
So that is your general proof for limit. We're just going to work with linear examples
and quadratic examples. In this class, you can take more advanced classes if you really
want to prove a whole bunch of delta epsilons, but you should be very familiar with how to
set up the proof. Always let epsilon be greater than zero. Choose a delta equal to something,
and then assume that x minus a is less than delta, and then ultimately we play with f
of x minus l, that f of x minus l is less than epsilon, and if you do that, you've got
a perfect delta epsilon proof. Practice a few of these. We will see you in class where
we can talk more about these proofs in more detail.
Number three is going to be all about the derivatives. So to start off, we really need
to know what is the derivative. Specifically, when we say the derivative, what we're talking
about is the slope of a tangent line to a function. So the question we're going to answer
is how do we find the slope of a tangent line?
And really, to answer this question, when we want the slope of a tangent line through
a specific point, there are two methods. Both work equally well. Sometimes one is better
than the other to find the slope of a tangent line.
Also, by way of vocabulary, when we say the slope of a tangent line, what we're talking
about is what is called in calculus the derivative, the rate of change instantaneously at that
point. So the first method we're going to look at, kind of to set it up graphically,
say we've got some curve going on here, and we've got some point that we want to look
at. We want to know what is the slope, what is the rate of change of the tangent line at
that point. So if I go up from a, we get a point on the line, and that is at f of a.
Well to get a slope, we need a second point that we can calculate it off of. So we'll
go off to the right here, and we'll pick some other random x, which has a point on the line
and some f of x solution to that. So the coordinates of that second point in red are x, f of x,
and the coordinates of the point in green are a, f of a. And the tangent line is the
line that connects those two dots. Actually that's a secant line. But the way we make
that secant line, actually let's first talk about the secant line. What is the slope of
the secant line? Well to get the slope of the secant line, it's just the slope of the
slope formula that we know already, y2 minus y1, and then we divide it by subtract the
x's. So for the slope of the secant line, that's going to be f of x minus f of a, subtracting
the y's, divided by x minus a, subtracting the x coordinates. And the way we make that
secant line into a tangent line is we take x and move it closer and closer to a. We move
x to a, and then that line is going to become less secant and more tangent. Well we know
how to express that, that the slope of the tangent line then is the limit as x approaches
a of that same function, f of x minus f of a, all over x minus a. So that is our first
possible formula. It's going to be an important one for us for how to find the slope of the
tangent line. There is a second way that's used quite often, and in fact we'll probably
use it more often overall in the course, that is similar to what we just did. So again,
we'll make our little graph, and we've got some curve going on. And we'll have some
a, which goes up to a point at f of a. But instead of going over to some x randomly,
we're going to increase what we call h. So we end up with a point over here that's a
plus h. And actually let me do that in red. A plus h. And so the a plus h gets this point
up here, and so what we actually end up with is f of a plus h. So if we want the slope
of the secant line that connects these two together, just like before, the slope of the
secant line is going to be equal to the difference in the y's divided by the difference in the
x's. Let's go ahead and label that. This red point, the x coordinate is a plus h, and
the y coordinate is f of a plus h. And then the green point is a comma f of a again. So
for the slope, subtract the y's, f of a plus h, minus f of a, all over the x coordinates
a plus h, minus a, which is nice because the a's actually subtract out to zero. So we really
have is f of a plus h, minus f of a, all over h. And the way we make this slope into a,
or the secant line into a tangent line, is we say we want that h, the amount we move
over to be basically zero. So we make the h go to zero. Or we say that the slope of the
tangent line is equal to the limit as h goes to zero of that function, f of a plus h, minus
f of a, all over h. And that is the second way we can find the derivative at a point.
And both of these functions are going to give us the same answer, but it's two ways to
get at that same value. And sometimes one way will be easier than another way. So what
we're going to do is we're going to work through three examples where we calculate the slope
of the tangent line, and also the equation of the tangent line while we're at it. But
we're going to solve it both ways so we can kind of compare how the two formulas work
together. So our first example that we're going to do is a polynomial. First we're going
to find the slope, and then we'll find the equation of the tangent line. Our polynomial
is f of x equals x squared minus 3x. And we're going to find the slope of the tangent
line at x equals 1. The first thing we need to know is what's the y-coordinate that we're
working with. So f of 1 is equal to 1 squared minus 3 times 1, which is 1 minus 3 or negative
2. So we're really working with 1 comma negative 2 as our point.
So using our first formula to solve for the slope of the tangent line, we know that the
slope is equal to the limit as x approaches a of f of x minus f of a all over x minus
a. Plugging in what we have then, we've got the limit as x this time is going to 1. Of
f of x, which is x squared minus 3x, subtract the f of a, which is what we just found, f
of 1 is negative 2, so subtracting negative 2 is the same as adding 2, all over x minus
the 1. What we see here is we can't do direct substitution
because if we do, we divide by 0. But we worked with this problem a lot with limits in our
previous unit, so we know we need to factor that numerator. It's going to be x minus 2
times x minus 1 over the x minus 1. And when we do that, the x minus 1's can divide out.
And now that we've removed that discontinuity, we can plug into our function the limit value
of 1. So x minus 2 becomes 1 minus 2, which means we have a slope of negative 1. Now,
I did say there were two definitions. Remember, the second definition would be as we took
the limit as h goes to 0 of f of a plus h minus f of a all over h. So we have the limit
as h goes to 0 of f of a plus h. Remember, a in this case is 1, so that really means
1 plus h. So x squared becomes 1 plus h squared minus 3x, which is 1 plus h. And then we
subtract f of a, which we've already figured out in blue up above, is negative 2. So minus
negative 2 means plus 2 all over h. Multiplying out the pieces here, we've got the limit as
h goes to 0. Squaring it, we get 1 plus 2h plus h squared minus 3 minus 3h plus 2. And
all over h. What's nice here is if we do the 1 minus 3 plus 2, 1 plus 2 is 3 minus 3
is 0. So now, we've got 2, or the limit, as h goes to 0 of 2h plus h squared minus 3
h all over h. Every single term there has an h in it that we can factor out to remove
our discontinuity. H times 2 plus h minus 3 all over h. I probably could have combined
the 2 and 3, wouldn't matter. But ultimately, those h's divide out, and now we can plug
in the 0 for h. So we have 2 plus 0 minus 3, which is negative 1. We get the same slope
of the tangent line. The slope at 1 is negative 1. Now that we know the slope, we can find
the equation. Remember, the equation is y equals m times x minus 1. Now that we know
minus x1 plus y1. So plugging in the pieces, y equals the slope of negative 1 times x minus
the x-coordinate is 1, and the y-coordinate is negative 2. We have the equation of our
tangent line. Let's try another example where we work through both of the formulas. Let's
do a fraction. Let's say f of x is equal to 3 over x plus 1, and we want the slope of
the tangent line at x equals 2. Well, first we need to know what the y-coordinate is at
2. So we'll find f of a, or f of 2, remember that's the a, is equal to 3 over 2 plus 1,
and 3 over 3 is just equal to 1. So we have the point x is 2, y is 1, or a is 2, and
f of a is 1. We had two formulas to find the derivative, or the slope of the tangent line
at 2. Both of them work, give you the same answer. We're going to do both just so that
we can see it worked out both ways. The first is the limit as x approaches a of f of x minus
f of a, all over x minus a. So for this function, we're doing the limit as x minus x minus x
approaches 2 this time of the function, 3 over x plus 1, minus f of a. We've already found
out that f of a is equal to 1, all over x minus the a, which is 2. What we see here is we've
got a complex fraction inside a limit, but we've seen this before. We know we can get
rid of that by multiplying by the x plus 1, distributing it through on top and bottom.
And when we do, be careful with that negative sign. The x plus 1's are gone, and we get
the limit as x goes to 2 of 3 minus 1x minus 1, all over x minus 2 times x plus 1.
The limit as x goes to 2 of 2 minus x over x minus 2 times x plus 1. And we know 2 minus
x and x minus 2 can divide out as long as there's a negative 1 left over, because the
subtraction's in the wrong order. And now that we've removed that discontinuity, we
can do direct substitution and plug 2 into the fraction. So we have negative 1 over x,
which is 2 plus 1, and this gives us negative 1 third for our slope. The slope at 2 is
negative 1 third. Let's try and work that out again, this time using our second definition
of the derivative at a point, and that's the one where we take the limit as h goes to 0
of f of a plus h minus f of a, all over h. So the limit as h goes to 0 of, this time we're
going to take a plus h, a is 2, because we're at 2, so 2 plus h, of 3 over x, which is 2
plus h plus 1 minus the f of the a. We can do direct substitution and plug 2 into the
numerator. We know that's 1, all over x, or all over h. The simplifying step is going
to feel almost exactly the same. We need to get rid of that denominator, so we're going
to multiply by 2 plus h plus 1 all the way across the numerator and the denominator.
We're going to leave the denominator factored, however, because that's going to reduce out
the h in just a minute. First fraction, we're just left with 3 minus, distribute the negative
one through, minus 2, minus h, minus 1, all over h, don't forget the limit as h goes
to 0, all over h times 2 plus h plus 1, and we could have combined the 2 and the 1 if
we wanted to. It's not going to make much difference. What's nice now, though, is if
we do 3 minus 2 minus 1, that's completely gone. Why don't we do that simplifying? We
have the limit as h goes to 0 of negative h over h times 2 plus 1 is 3 plus h. We notice
those h's are gone. We've removed the discontinuity, and so we're able to just plug 0 in. We have
negative 1 over 3 plus 0, which is negative 1 third.
Same answer both times, so I'm feeling pretty confident going into my equation of the tangent
line here. The equation is y equals my slope, negative 1 third times x minus the x coordinate,
minus the x coordinate, which is 2, plus the y coordinate, which is 1. The equation of
the tangent line to 3 over x plus 1 at x equals 2 is y equals negative 1 third times x minus
2 plus 1. One more example that I want to work through using both equations. This one
is going to be finding the derivative with a radical. We're going to find the derivative
or the slope of the tangent line of f of x equals the square root of x plus 1 at x equals
3. x equals 8, sorry, at x equals 8. So to do that, we first need to know the y coordinate.
So f of 8 is equal to the square root of 8 plus 1. 8 plus 1 is 9. Square root is 3,
so we're talking about the 0.8 comma 3. We have two ways to find the derivative. We're
going to do both here, so you can see how they both work out. The first is the limit as x
approaches a of f of x minus f of a all over x minus a. So for our problem, the limit as
x is going to an x coordinate of 8 of f of x, which is the square root of x plus 1, minus
f of a, and we just found out that f of 8 is 3, all over x minus a, and that a value
was 8. Now we've worked with limits with removable discontinuities and radicals before. Our strategy
in the past was we get rid of the radical by multiplying by the conjugate, and so we'll
do just that. We'll multiply by the square root of x plus 1, change it to a plus 3 over
the square root of x plus 1 plus 3, and that's going to remove the radical in the numerator
and hopefully set up something we can reduce. So we now have the limit as x goes to 8. In
the numerator, conjugates will just square both of them and put minus between them. When
we square a square root, we're just left with the stuff x plus 1. Always a minus between
them and 3 squared is 9. Over, we've got the x minus 8 times the square root of x plus
1 plus 3. Clean up a bit to combine like terms in the numerator. We've got the limit as x
approaches 8 of x minus 8 over x minus 8 times the square root of x plus 1 plus 3, and that's
nice because the x minus 8s divide out. Always remember when we divide out everything, there's
still a 1 in the numerator, and what's really nice is we've removed that discontinuity. So
we're ready to plug that 8 into x. We've got 1 over the square root of 8 plus 1 plus 3.
8 plus 1 is 9, the square root of 9 is 3, plus 3 is 6. We seem to be getting a slope
of 1 sixth at x equals 8. Now just to practice the other definition as well, we've got the
limit as h approaches 0 of f of a plus h minus f of a all over h. I like writing it every
time until you get this ingrained in your head. It's an important formula to know for
the rest of this unit and beyond. So we've got the limit as h goes to 0 of f of a. This
time a is 8, so we're going to plug 8 plus h into the x, the square root of 8 plus h,
and there's a plus 1 minus f of a. We've already calculated that to be 3 all over h. Same strategy
from here. We're going to get rid of the radical by multiplying by the conjugate, which is
the square root of, let's go ahead and combine the light terms. 8 plus 1 is 9 plus h. We're
going to make it a plus 3, square root of 9 plus h plus 3, and when we do that, let's
go on to the next line. We've got the limit as h goes to 0 of square the square root.
We get 9 plus h, negative 3 plus 3 is negative 9 over h times the square root of 9 plus h
plus 3, which is really nice because 9 minus 9 is 0 and that leaves us with the limit as
h goes to 0 of h over h times the square root of 9 plus h plus 3. Reduce out the h's, remembering
that leaves us with 1, but what's important there is we have removed our discontinuity,
so we're ready to plug 0 in for h. We've got 1 over the square root of 9 plus 0 plus 3,
which is 1 over 9 plus 0 is 9, the square root of 9 is 3, plus 3 is 6, and we get the
exact same slope. We are ready to write the equation of our tangent line at 8 is y equals
m, the slope of 1 sixth times x minus the x coordinate of 8 plus the y coordinate of
3, y equals 1 sixth times x minus 8 plus 3. That's how we can find the equation of the
tangent line at a point. We can use one of these two formulas. I believe the homework
assignment tells you which formula to use for a given problem, so you get practice using
both formulas with similar types of problems. But once you find the slope of the tangent
line from one of those points, we just plug it into our equation formula. Take a look at
some problems and we will see you in class. In our previous lesson, we talked about how
we could find the derivative at a specific point, but today we're going to extend that
discussion and answer the question of how can we calculate the derivative at every point?
So, to set this up, we are going to expand our definition of the derivative to, instead
of just calculating the slope of the tangent line at a specific point, we're going to
start to look at the derivative as a function. And specifically, that function is going to
be written as f with a little mark that we call prime, f prime of x. That means it's
the derivative of f at x. f prime of x is equal to the limit as h goes to 0. And we're
going to take that second definition of a derivative and kind of generalize it to f
of x plus h minus f of x all over h. And this is going to be our equation to calculate
the derivative as a function for all points x. So, if we can just calculate this thing,
we just have to plug in the x value to get the actual derivative at any point we're interested
in. So, let's see if we can actually use this formula to find the derivative of, let's start
with f of x equals x squared minus 4x plus 1. So, to calculate the derivative f prime
of x, we're going to replace each of the x's with the x plus h. So, x plus h, it becomes
x plus h squared. Oops, forgot the limit part. Don't forget the limit part, that's important.
Limit as h goes to 0 of x plus h squared minus 4 times x, which is now x plus h, plus 1,
and then the derivative function says subtract the entire function f of x. It's very important
when you do this, you put the function in parentheses because otherwise we're going
to run into a sin air. We're not just subtracting the first term. Now, we want to make sure
we subtract the entire thing. That negative is going to ultimately, in our next step,
compute through that parentheses onto the entire polynomial there. We'll get there in
a minute, but don't forget to put the function in parentheses, and it's all over h. So, cleaning
this up then, we're going to end up with the limit as h goes to 0 of, and when we square,
we get x squared plus 2xh plus h squared. Distribute the negative 4 through, we get
negative 4x minus 4h, plus a 1. Then distributing the negative through, we get negative x squared,
positive 4x and a negative 1, distributing that negative all the way through, all over
h. But what's nice now is this is as ugly as it gets because you'll start to see lots
of things are going to disappear. We've got x squared and a negative x squared. Those
go to 0. We've got a negative 4x and a positive 4x. Those go to 0. We've got a positive 1
and a negative 1. Those go to 0. So, when we clean up, we just have left the limit as
h goes to 0 of 2xh plus h squared, minus 4h, all over h. We want to remove the discontinuity
at h, and it's nice because we can factor out in h. So, we have the limit as h goes
to 0 of h times 2x plus h minus 4, all over h. And now, we're going to get a negative
we divide out the h's. We've removed the discontinuity so we can replace h with what it's approaching,
0, 2x plus 0 minus 4, or just 2x minus 4, is the equation for the derivative of the tangent
line of x squared minus 4x plus 1. Now, if we wanted to know the derivative at any value
we just plug in that number. If we want to know what the derivative is when x equals
0, plug 0 in, we get negative 4. If we want to know what the derivative is at 10, we
plug 10 in, we get 20 minus 4, which is 16. And it's really quick to calculate the derivative
now that we have a function to describe it. Let's try one more example. Let's take f of
x is equal to the square root of 2x plus 1 and see if we can calculate her derivative.
So to calculate the derivative, f prime of x, it's equal to the limit as h approaches
0 of f of x plus h. We're going to replace the x with x plus h. That gives us the square
root of 2 times x plus h plus 1 minus the function itself, which is the square root
of 2x plus 1, all over the h. Well, we've seen square roots before. We know to get rid
of them. We multiply by the conjugate. So we have the square root of, and I'm going
to go ahead and distribute just to save us the work, 2x plus 2h plus 1. We use plus
the opposite sign, the square root of 2x plus 1, and do the same thing in the denominator.
2x plus 2h plus 1 plus the square root of 2x plus 1. When we do that, we have the limit
as h goes to 0. We square the square roots. They're gone. We've got a minus in between
them. So we have 2x plus 2h plus 1 plus 2h plus 1 plus 2h plus 2h plus 1 plus 2h plus
minus between them. Don't forget the minus between them. Minus, and I'm going to go ahead
and distribute that negative onto both parts. Make sure it goes onto both parts. Negative
2x minus 1 all over h times, and we'll leave this factor because we want to be able to
reduce the square root of 2x plus 2h plus 1 plus the square root of 2x plus 1. And then
things become nice for us. 2x minus 2x is 0. 1 minus 1 is 0. And so we just have the
limit as h goes to 0 of 2h over h times the square root of 2x plus 2h plus 1 plus the
square root of 2x plus 1. And ultimately those h's divide out and we have removed the
discontinuity. Now we're ready to plug in what we know. h is 0. So we have 2 over the square
root of 2x plus 2 times 0 plus 1 plus the square root of 2x plus 1. What's nice is that
square root of 2x plus 1, what's nice is that 2 times 0 is actually equal to 0. So we have
matching radicals in the denominator. 2x plus 1 times 2x plus 1. So we've got 2 of those.
So we have 2 over 2 square roots of 2x plus 1. And actually we can reduce out the 2's.
Which is going to leave behind a 1. So for our final function 1 over the square root
of 2x plus 1. So now that we know kind of how to calculate derivatives, and there will
be a lot to practice on the assignment and in class, I want to talk a little bit about
how the derivative is connected to the graph of the function. We're going to see if we
can sketch a graph of a derivative. Because remember the derivative describes the slope
or the rate of change of the tangent line. In fact, let's write that down. The derivative
is the slope of the tangent line. So if the graph is increasing, if the graph is going
uphill, then it's got a positive slope. Because the slope is going uphill. So if we're going
in other words, f prime of x has to be greater than zero. That means the graph must be going
uphill somehow. You see it's going uphill from left to right. It's got a positive slope.
If the slope, or if the graph, is decreasing, the graph is going downhill, and the graph
the tangent line will also go downhill. So the slope of the tangent line is negative.
In other words, the derivative f prime of x is negative. It's less than zero. The graph
is going downhill. So the graph of the tangent line is also negative, showing the downhill
slope. I guess we could also say the neutral statement, that if the graph hits a flat
point, the graph is flat, then we could say the slope is zero. In other words, we would
say f prime of x is equal to zero. That could happen a couple of ways. It could be going
up and level out. So there's your slope zero right on top. It could be going down and
leveling out. So your slope is zero down there on the bottom. It's completely flat. Or it
could make a trough where it comes up, levels out, and keeps going up, or keeps going down.
But you notice right in the middle there, the tangent line does level out as it changes
direction.
So what this looks like then on a graph is, for an example, as if I have a function here,
we'll call this f of x. And let's see, we're going to put a point on the graph at, let's
give it some height, two. We'll put a point on this graph at negative three, negative
two. And another point at negative one, comma two. Then a point at two, comma negative two.
And then we'll connect it by coming in from the top, hitting the first point and going
up, hitting the second point and going down. And we're going to make a trough where we
level out and keep going down at the third point. Let me see if I can make that a little
better here. Down, maximum, level off. There we go. Maybe. We'll call that good enough.
In order to draw a graph of the derivative of this function, a graph of f prime of x,
what we'll do is we'll kind of make some observations about this graph. The first observation that's
going to be helpful to us is, identify a graph of f prime of x. What we'll do is we'll kind
of make some observations about this graph. The first observation that's going to be helpful
to us is identifying where the tangent line is completely flat. Because at all of those
points where the tangent line is flat, we know the slope is equal to zero. Which means
we've got a zero on our graph at each of those points. So the slope is zero here at negative
three. At negative three there's a zero. At negative one the slope is zero. And at positive
two the slope is zero. That's where we've got our x intercepts of zero. Because the
graph is describing the slope. The next thing I notice is the graph starts going downhill.
The slope is negative. So we need to start negative on our graph until we hit that point.
After that the graph starts going uphill. It's increasing. The slope is positive until
the next zero. So we need to make sure our graph is positive until we hit the next zero.
Notice the green line is now all above the x axis positive to the next zero. Then we're
decreasing to the next zero. So we're going to be negative. We need to be negative to
the next zero. But afterwards it's still decreasing. Which means after the next zero
we still need to be decreasing. We still need to be negative. So the graph starts negative,
turns positive, turns negative, and then stays negative. And so we've sketched approximately
not exactly but pretty close to what the derivative of this first function looks like. Because
we know that if the graph is increasing the derivative is positive. If the graph is decreasing
the derivative is negative. And if the graph is flat the derivative is zero. I have one
more extension I want to put onto this lesson. And it's really just more of the same of
what we saw at the beginning along with a little bit of notation. And it's this idea
of what we call higher ordered derivatives. And the idea here is if we take a function
and we can find its derivative, which is also a function, we should be able to take its
derivative to get another function. And then take its derivative to get another function
and just keep taking derivatives of derivatives. Derivatives of derivatives. And to set this
up I want to talk a little bit about notation and one of the challenges of calculus that
came out of it. Calculus was developed simultaneously by both Newton who gets all the credit and
Leibniz, I'm probably pronouncing his name wrong, but both of them used a different notation
for how to express the derivative. And so as a result we have two different notations
for how to express the derivative. Newton used f of x and his compadre used y. And so
when we're talking about the first derivative, the derivative that we just take, Newton would
just put a prime on it. So we'd see f prime of x to represent the first derivative. Alternatively
with just the y we could call that dy dx, which is the derivative of y with respect
to x. What the variable is that we're working with. The second derivative then, the derivative
of the derivative, with f of x notation we just do a double prime to show the derivative
has been taken twice. However with the dy dx notation we say we take the derivatives
twice of y with respect to x twice. And so we get d2y over dx2. And then we kind of
extend that to the third, fourth, fifth, and beyond derivatives where you'll see three
primes to represent the third derivative. And then it's d3y for the third derivative
of y with respect to x three times. So that's kind of the notation you might see. But really
it just means take the same formula for the same idea. In other words the derivative of
the derivative, or f prime prime of x, is equal to the limit as h goes to zero of f prime
of x plus h minus f prime of x all over h. In fact I'm not even going to mark this as
a key formula because it's the exact same derivative formula. This time we're just working with
the derivative to calculate the second derivative. Let's do an example where we can see that
worked out. We're going to find the second derivative of 3x squared minus 3x squared minus 3x squared.
Minus 4x plus 1. Well in order to find the second derivative we first have to know what
the first derivative is. So let's find the first derivative f prime of x is equal to
the limit as h goes to zero of f of x plus h. I'm going to replace the x's with x plus
h. 3 times x plus h squared minus 4 times x plus h plus 1 minus the f of x which we're
going to put in parentheses so we don't forget to distribute the negative through minus 3x
squared minus 4x plus 1 all over h. Which is equal to the limit as h goes to zero of
with this first part we have to square the x plus h and then distribute a 3 through. So
I'm just going to square it off to the side here. x squared plus 2xh plus h squared. And
then I'll distribute the 3 into that. So we have 3x squared plus 6xh plus 3h squared.
Distribute the negative to get negative 4x minus 4h plus 1. Distribute the negative through
to get negative 3x squared plus 4x minus 1 all over h. Hopefully we can clean this up
a bit. 3x squared minus 3x squared is 0. Negative 4x plus 4x is 0. 1 minus 1 is 0. And so we
have the limit as h goes to zero of 6xh plus 3h squared. And so we have the limit as h
squared minus 4h all over h. And we remove that discontinuity by factoring out the h.
Times 6x plus 3h minus 4 all over the h. The h is divided out and now we can just plug
in the 0. So we have 6x plus 3 times 0 minus 4 which is equal to just 6x minus 4. But that
is just the first derivative. This problem wanted us to find the second derivative. So
using our new function we take the derivative again. f prime prime of x is equal to the
limit as h goes to 0 of f of x plus h. We are going to replace the x with x plus h. So
we have 6 times x plus h minus 4. Subtract the function or subtract the 6x minus 4 and
put it all over h. Distributing through we get the limit as h goes to 0 of 6x plus 6h
minus 4 minus 6x plus 4. Distributing that negative through all over h. Fortunately we
can subtract some things out. 6 minus 6x is 0. Negative 4 plus 4 is 0. And so we have
the limit as h goes to 0 of 6h over h. Which is really nice because the h is divided out.
And we are just left with a single simple number 6 as our second derivative of 3x squared
minus 4x plus 1. If I wanted to find the third derivative we would just run through the formula
again. But ultimately with this lesson today the important key thing is that you know the
function for the derivative is the limit as h goes to 0 of f of x plus h minus f of x
all over h. Try a few and practice this. We will take a look at it more in class and we
will see you then. Now that we have gotten comfortable with the definition of the derivative
the common frustration is how tedious that formula is. So the question that starts to
come up is what are some derivative shortcuts so that we don't have to go through that formula
every time. And you can imagine as a function becomes very complicated the derivative function
could become very tedious to work through. Well there is lots of derivative shortcuts
we are going to look at over the next several lessons. We are going to look today at four
basic shortcuts. And then after that we will take a look at two important shortcuts that
are a little bit more involved. The most basic is the constant shortcut. And the idea of
the constant shortcut is if we take the derivative d dx is the alternative notation for a derivative
the derivative of some constant or some number we are going to always get 0 for our answer
because if a constant is a straight line the derivative of a straight flat line is 0. So
for example if I wanted to calculate the derivative of 5 a constant well that is just going to
be 0 because 5 is not changing it has a slope of 0. The second basic shortcut is the power
rule and this is probably the one we will use the most. And the idea is if we are taking
the derivative of x raised to some exponent. When we have x raised to some exponent we
will pull that exponent out in front and then we will reduce the exponent by 1. And this
is probably the most used derivative shortcut. With polynomials we pull the exponent out
front and then decrease the exponent by 1. So for example if I wanted the derivative
of x to the 7th power all I have to do is I move that 7th power out front and then I
reduce the exponent by 1 and we get 7x to the 6th. A third rule I am going to call it
the sum rule it is often called the difference rule as well because it works with plus or
minus and the idea is if I take the derivative of some function plus or minus another function
where I know the derivative of the individual pieces all I have to do is take the derivative
of the individual pieces and it is f prime plus g prime of x. So for example combining
the power rule and the sum rule together it should be plus or minus. If I wanted the
derivative of x to the 5th minus x squared plus x plus 2 we just take the derivatives
of the individual pieces. The power rule says we move the exponent out front and subtract
1. So we get 5x to the 4th minus x squared bring the 2 out front, subtract 1 from the
exponent we just have x plus with x that is really x to the 1st so we pull the 1 out
front and drop it by 1 so x to the 0 is just 1 and then the derivative of 2 a constant
is just 0 so all that we are left with is the 5x to the 4th minus 2x plus 1. The final
basic shortcut is the constant multiplier which says if I am taking the derivative of
some constant times a function we keep that constant in front and multiply it by the derivative
of that constant and then we multiply it by the derivative of that constant and then we
get the inside function and that is the 4th basic shortcut. So for example if I wanted
the derivative now of 3x to the 5th minus 2x to the 4th plus 5x squared minus 7x plus
1. Let's get us a little more white board space so we can put it right underneath it.
The 3 can just be multiplied by whatever the derivative is of x to the 5th. Well we know
we pulled that exponent out front so 3 times 5 is 15, x to the 1 less 4th power minus bringing
the exponent out front 2 times 4 is 8, x cubed shrinking the exponent by 1 plus 2 times 5
is 10, x shrinking the exponent by 1 minus 7 times 1 is 7. Shrink the exponent by 1 and
the x disappears and the derivative of the constant is 0 so now we have our new derivative
of that polynomial. These 4 basic rules of differentiation will save us a lot of work
and time on that derivative formula. Now in fact we should be able to quite quickly find
the equation of the tangent line to f of x equals 4x cubed minus 2x squared plus 2x squared
plus 5x minus 1 at x equals negative 1. Well first we need to know what the y coordinate
is that we're going to end up with. Actually no, first let's actually find the derivative
at 1. So first we're going to take the derivative f prime of x is equal to 4 times 3 is 12,
x squared subtract 1 from the exponent minus 2 times 2 is 4, x plus 5 and the x disappears.
We want it at specifically x equals negative 1 so we'll do f prime of negative 1 which
is 12 times negative 1 squared minus 4 times negative 1 plus 5 and if we work that out
it becomes 12 plus 4 plus 5 is 21. So the slope we now know is 21. We do need to know
the y coordinate of this point when x is 1 what is y equal? So we do need to plug the
negative 1 into the original function as well. f of negative 1 is equal to 4 times negative
1 cubed minus 2 times negative 1 squared plus 5 times negative 1 minus 1. So our y coordinate
is equal to negative 4 plus 2 minus 5 minus 1 which gives us negative 12. So we're going
to take the derivative at 1 minus 12. So for the equation of our line, y equals the slope
we found out was 21 times x minus x1 minus negative 1 is plus 1 minus 12 and our line
tangent to our function is 21 times x plus 1 minus 12. So those are our basic equations
to help with differentiation. The next two are a little more involved and they take a
bit of practice to get used to using. We'll see a lot of errors with this one particularly
which is the product rule. The product rule says that the derivative of two pieces that
are multiplied by each other f of x times g of x. The common error I see is people just
take the derivative of both and multiply and they say f prime times g prime. That is incorrect
and it does not work. What we actually do is the derivative of the first part times the
second part plus the derivative of the second part times the first part. So there's two
parts to it and we take the derivative of the first part in the first part and the derivative
of the second part in the second part. So for example if I wanted to take the derivative
of 3x squared minus 5x plus 1 times 2x squared plus 4x minus 7 we've got two individual parts.
So the formula says we take the derivative of the first part. The first part, the 3x
squared, let's color code these. We'll do the first part in blue and the second part
in green just so we can see how this works out. So in blue the derivative of the first
part is 6x minus 5. Then that is multiplied by the second part 2x squared plus 4x minus
7. Plus then we take the derivative of the second part. The derivative of the second
part is 4x plus 4 times the second part. 3x squared plus 4x plus 4 times the second part
of 5x squared minus 5x plus 1. And this then as ugly as it looks is the correct answer
for the derivative of that product. The derivative of the first times the second plus the derivative
of the second times the first. Let's look at one more. Let's do the derivative of 5 over
x squared plus 3 over x times 2x cubed minus 7. Whoa, we don't really have a derivative
trick for x as being in the denominator. Actually we do. We just need to tweak this
problem a little bit and rewrite it as the derivative of and think about what type of
exponent sticks things in the denominator. Well a negative exponent does that. This is
really 5x to the negative 2 plus 3x to the negative 1 times the 2x cubed minus 7. So
again now we are multiplying two polynomials. A first part times the second part. And the
formula says it's equal to the derivative of the first. 5 times negative 2 is negative
10x. And if we subtract 1 from negative 2 the new exponent is negative 3. 3 times negative
1 is negative 3x. Subtract 1 from the exponent and we get negative 2. The derivative of the
first times the second 2x cubed minus 7 plus the derivative of the second 2 times 3 is
6x squared and the negative 7 is a constant so there is nothing there. Times the first
5x to the negative 1. I'm sorry 5x to the negative 2 plus 3x to the negative 1. And
this then is the derivative of that product. That is the product rule. Similar to the product
rule is what we are going to call the quotient rule. And I should probably label this as C. The quotient
rule. And it's got two tweaks to make it different. But it's very similar. If I'm taking the
derivative of two things that are divided. F of x divided by g of x. Be careful this is
not f prime divided by g prime. We can't just divide the derivatives. Instead we will take
the derivative of the first times the second. And because this is division we will actually
subtract the derivative of the second times the first. And the big difference here is
we have to divide by the denominator squared. Which is kind of interesting. We end up with
the square denominator in the denominator. So for example if I'm being asked to find
the derivative of 4x squared minus 5x plus 1. Over x squared minus 7. We've got a top
piece. And we've got a bottom piece. Keeping track of that then we take the derivative
of the first piece. 4 times 2 is 8x minus 5. Times the denominator just like it is.
x squared minus 7. Then we subtract the derivative of the denominator. x squared becomes 2x.
Times the numerator which is 4x squared minus 5x plus 1. And then in the denominator we
take the old denominator. x squared minus 7. And we square it. To get our final result
we take the final big ugly but correct derivative. This formula takes a little bit of practice
to get really comfortable with. But it certainly is much nicer than doing it with the derivative
formula. Let's do another one. Let's take the derivative of the square root of x over
2x cubed minus 7 over x. We get the derivative of the derivative of the square root of x
one thing you might notice right away is that we need to rewrite that so it's that friendly
polynomial so we can use our exponent trick. So we're going to actually find the derivative.
Square root is really just a one half power over 2x cubed minus 7x to the negative one
which is what moved that x into the denominator. Now we have a clear numerator and denominator
to use in our formula. We take the derivative of the first one. Pull the exponent out front.
x subtract one from one half. One half minus one is negative one half. Times the denominator
which is 2x cubed minus 7x to the negative one. Subtract and then we take the derivative
of the denominator. Two times three is six x squared. Negative seven times negative one
is positive seven x to the now negative two times the first function which is x to the
one half. And this is all over that denominator 2x cubed minus 7x to the negative one squared.
And we now have the derivative of our quotient. And we now have the derivative of our quotient
Now that we have a couple derivative rules we can actually take a look at some applications
of the derivative and solve some more interesting problems. And one of the most common applications
of the derivative is the relationship between the position of an object, the velocity of
that object, and that object's acceleration. All three of these things are connected by
derivatives because the derivative is the rate of change. And so the velocity does not
describe how the position is changing. The acceleration describes how the velocity is
changing. So these three variables or functions really we can make for each of them. The position
describes where the object is at time t. And we will use the derivative of the derivative
to use the function s of t to represent the object's position at a given moment of time.
But it's moving. And so to describe the speed or rate at which it's moving we have the velocity.
Which the velocity can be thought of as speed, but speed doesn't really have a direction.
Velocity does have a direction. Positive, generally meaning to the right. Negative, generally meaning
to the left. So speed with direction. Or the rate of change at which the position is
changing. So the change in position. So we will use v of t to represent the velocity
at a specific point in time. But because it's the change in position we say that it's
the derivative of the position. Finally we have the acceleration. Or how fast the velocity
is changing. The change in velocity. And we use a of t to represent the acceleration.
And we use a of t to represent the acceleration. And because that's describing the change in
velocity that's the derivative of the velocity. Or the second derivative of the position.
So knowing that we have this relationship between position, velocity, and acceleration
all connected by the derivative we can solve problems in relationship to these three questions.
So for example if the position of an object in feet after t seconds is given by s of t
is equal to t cubed divided by 5 minus 3 over t squared. What is its velocity and acceleration?
After two seconds. First thing I'm going to do with this function is I'm going to change
it to be a nicer polynomial because I don't like having the, or a nicer rational expression.
I don't like having the fraction in a fraction. So I'm going to write that as t to the negative
2. So s of t is equal to t cubed over 5 minus 3 t to the negative 2 power. And then we can
take the derivative of this function to find the velocity function. So the velocity at
time t, this is a quotient. So we take the derivative of the top which is 3 t squared
times the denominator which is 5 minus 3 t to the negative 2 minus the derivative of
the denominator which is negative 3 times negative 2 is positive 6 t to the negative
3 times the numerator t cubed all over the denominator 5 minus 3 t to the negative 2
squared. I'm going to clean that up a little bit just so that we can take a second derivative
of it because we're also being asked about the acceleration. So when we distribute through
we get 3 times 5 is 15 t squared minus 9 and when we add the exponents we get 0 t's.
And then minus 6 and we have 0 t's. Since we have negative 9 minus 6 I'm going to write
that as negative 15 over and I'm going to go ahead and square this out. We've got 25
minus 30 t to the negative 2 plus 9 t to the negative 4.
So we should be able to calculate the velocity after 2 seconds by plugging 2 into this formula
15 times 2 squared minus 15 over 25 minus 30 times not t but 2 to the negative 2 plus
9 t which is 2 to the negative 4 power. And we can plug this into our handy dandy calculator.
Second quit to get me to the home screen. We need a parenthesis around the numerator 15
times 2 squared minus 15 close the parenthesis the velocity.
Divided by parenthesis for the denominator 25 minus 30 times 2 raised to the negative
2 power plus 9 times 2 raised to the negative 4 power and then close the parenthesis on
the denominator and my velocity at 2 seconds seems to be about 2.49.
Feet per second almost 2.5 feet every second this guy is going to travel. That's the velocity.
But the problem is also asking for the acceleration so let's scroll down to give us some more white
board space. The acceleration then at t is going to be the derivative of the velocity.
So we've got this derivative of a velocity function. So we'll take the derivative of
the numerator which is 30 t times the denominator which is 25 minus 30 t to the negative 2 plus
9 t to the negative 4 minus the derivative of the denominator negative 30 times negative
2 is positive 60 t to the negative 3 minus 36 t to the negative 5 times the numerator
which is 15 t squared minus 15 and then that is all over the denominator squared 25 minus
30 t to the negative 2 plus 9 t to the negative 4 all squared. Now the problem was asking
us what's the acceleration at 2 seconds. So in order to get that we're going to need
to go back to our calculators. I'm not going to write it out I'm just going to put 2 in
for everything all the way across here. So we've got the numerator parenthesis 30 times
2 open a parenthesis 25 minus 30 times 2 raised to the negative 2 power plus 9 times 2 raised
to the negative 4 power close the parenthesis minus open a parenthesis 60 times 2 raised
to the negative 3 power minus 36 times 2 raised to the negative 5 power close the parenthesis
open a parenthesis 15 times 2 squared minus 15 close the parenthesis and close the parenthesis
on the numerator divided by denominator open a parenthesis 25 minus 30 t which we know
is 2 raised to the negative 2 power plus 9 times 2 raised to the negative 4 power close
the parenthesis on the denominator and square the denominator and hit enter the denominator
to find out our acceleration is 2.44 feet per second squared. So it might have been ugly
to type in the calculator but it just took time it wasn't difficult plugging 2 in for
all those t's. So that's velocity, acceleration and position derivatives of each other but
the big thing that I want you to practice with these differentiation rules specifically
focus on the product rule and the quotient rule. The sooner you master those the more
advantage you will have moving forward in our calculus class. So take a look at those practice
practice practice and we will see you in class to practice some more.
Now that we're able to quickly calculate derivatives we're able to look at some applications of
how we can use the derivative to model some real world situations. So our question is
what are some applications of the derivative? And the first one we've already kind of hinted
at over the past couple of lessons but we're going to formalize our discussion around position
which we use s of t as a function to represent position over time. Velocity is a function
of the derivative. And the first one we've already kind of hinted at over the past couple
of lessons. Where we use s of t as a function to represent position over time. Velocity
where we use v of t to represent the velocity over time. And acceleration. Where we use
a of t to represent the acceleration at some point in time. Now we've already discussed
the fact that the velocity is the derivative of position. Or more specifically v of t is
equal to the s prime of t. And we've also discussed that the acceleration of the derivative
is the derivative of the velocity. Or a of t is equal to v prime of t or the second derivative
of the position s prime prime of t. But what we haven't discussed is how velocity and acceleration
work together or against each other. For example, I want to look at if the acceleration is in
the same direction as the velocity. And if the acceleration is in the same direction,
in other words, we're getting more and more push in the direction that we're going. If
you think about the football player who's trying to get the first down on third and
inches, the players on his own team are pushing him as he accelerates in the same direction
as the push. He's going to end up going further and faster. So the object is going to, let
me put the word behind the front, the object will speed up because we're being pushed
in the direction we're running so we will run faster. And the opposite is also true
if they are in opposite directions. And the opposite is also true if they are in opposite
directions. Sticking with the football player analogy, you've got a football player running
down field and the defender grabs him and pulls him backwards. It doesn't necessarily
mean he's going to go backwards, but he's not going to go forward at the same speed
because those forces are in opposite directions. So because the push and the speed are in opposite
directions, it or the person slows down. So the acceleration pushes or pulls to either
speed up or slow down. The question is, are they going in the same direction? So let's
look at an example. The position of an object, the position of an object, the position of
an object, actually that's, we're going to have two examples. So let's say number three's
examples and example A is going to be the position of an object in t seconds is given
by s of t equals t cubed minus three t squared minus forty five t plus seven. So this is
the question we want to know is when is it speeding up? And when is it slowing down?
When are the acceleration and velocity pushing in the same direction? And when are they pushing
pulling against each other in opposite directions? Let's get us some space to work on that and
we'll attempt to answer that by first finding the function for the velocity, which is the
derivative of the s of t. And the derivative there is going to be three t squared minus
six t minus forty five. The acceleration then is going to be the derivative of the velocity,
which is going to be six t minus six. So we need to know when these are changing directions.
When does the velocity change directions from left to right? When does the acceleration
change from speed up to slow down or push to pull? And so really what we need to know
is when do they each cross the threshold of zero? Because that's when they change directions
from positive to negative, from push to pull, from faster to slower. So for each of these
we're going to solve for when they equal zero. So with the velocity zero equals three t squared
minus six t minus forty five. And we can solve that by first factoring out the gcf of three
t squared minus two t minus fifteen. And then continuing to factor that's t minus five
t plus three. And so setting each factor equal to zero, t is equal to five, or negative
three. Now generally we don't talk about negative times, so we're going to start at zero for
all of our time references, so really we don't care about the three. But at five, things
are probably changing at five because the velocity is changing direction at five.
Same thing with the acceleration, we want to know when that changes, so we'll make that
equal to zero, six t minus six. Add six to both sides, and six t equals six, divide by
six and t equals one, so something else of note is happening at one. So what we want
to know is if I make a little timeline here, something happens at one, and something happens
at five. We're going to look at how the velocity and the acceleration are behaving in these
time ranges. Specifically what we're interested in is are they positive or are they negative?
Because that's going to tell us if they're pushing each other or if they're pulling against
each other. Fortunately this is really easy to do on our calculators. What we're going
to do is we're going to type in the function for the velocity in y one, and then we'll
type in the function for the acceleration in y two. So y one, the velocity is three
t squared, we don't really have a t so we're going to use x, minus six t, or x, minus 45.
And in y two it's six t, or six x, minus six. Then we're going to go to the table settings.
Second table, and we can delete out whatever we were working on before. And what we'll
do for our x is we're going to pick an x that falls within each range on this number line.
So first we need something between zero and one, because our graph really starts at zero,
and we want to know what's happening in the middle of each of these areas. So between
zero and one, a good number is point five. Hit enter. And looking at that I see that
they're both negative. Remember the first, the middle column, the y one is the velocity,
the next one, the y two is the acceleration. But they're both negative, and that's what's
important to me right now, is they are negative between zero and one. Now let's pick something
between one and five, maybe three, three falls between one and five. Notice there the first
one, the velocity is negative, but the acceleration is positive. So the velocity is negative, but
the acceleration is positive. Finally we need something past five, maybe eight. We can
pick any number past five. And when I do that I see that they are both positive. So the
velocity is positive, and the acceleration is positive. Now we're ready to kind of interpret
what we've got here. When the velocity and the acceleration are both going in the same
direction, notice between zero and one they're both negative. That means the velocity it's
going backwards, and the acceleration is pushing further backwards, same direction,
we're going backwards at a faster and faster rate, we're actually speeding up between zero
and one. Then between one and five we see they're going in opposite directions. The
velocity is negative, so we're going backwards, but the acceleration is pulling it forward,
so it's starting to slow down and slow down and slow down because they're pulling in
opposite directions. Until finally the acceleration wins and gets the velocity going in the other
direction, and now they're both going in the positive direction with the acceleration pushing
in the positive direction, so we're going faster and faster. So again when they're the
same we're speeding up, when they're different we're slowing down. So giving it as a range
this item is speeding up between zero and one second, union five all the way to infinity,
and we'll always speed up while it's going to slow down between one and five.
Let's do another example where we can take a look at how the position of an object is
changing whether it's being pushed or pulled in the same direction or in the opposite direction.
So let's say the position of an object in seconds, using t for seconds, is given by s of t equals
x cubed minus 9x squared plus 24x minus 3, and so our question, our theme, is given
by s of t equals x cubed minus 9x squared plus 24x minus 3, and so our question is
when is it speeding up and slowing down? And we can decide that by looking at the velocity
function and the acceleration function, and determine when they're pushing or pulling
in the same direction or opposite directions. So the velocity, that's just the derivative
of the position, which is 3x squared minus 18x plus 24, the acceleration, it's the derivative
of the velocity, so that's 6x minus 18, and we're specifically interested when both of
these are changing between positive and negative because that's where things are going to change,
and they change at 0. So 0 equals 3x squared minus 18x plus 24 on the velocity, we'll factor
out a 3x squared minus 6x plus 4, nope, plus 8, sorry, 24 divided by 3 is 8, 0 equals 3
times x minus 4 times x minus 2, and so this time we have two solutions, x equals 4 and
x equals 2. With the acceleration we get our other key point by making it equal to 0, 6x
minus 18. If we add 18 to both sides and divide by 6, we get x is equal to 3. So something
is probably happening at 2, 3, and 4. So we'll make our little number line here, 0, 2, 3,
and 4, and we're going to be interested in what happens to the velocity and what happens
to the acceleration. Again, we'll use our calculator to help us do this a little quick,
quicker, hit y equals, and we're going to clear out the functions that are in here, make
sure you clear them out so you don't accidentally get the previous problem in here. The velocity
was 3x squared minus 18x, oops, x, 18x, there we go, plus 24, and we're going to be interested
in 4, and the acceleration is 6x minus 18, hit second table, delete out the old points,
and we need something between 0 and 2, 1 is between 0 and 2, and we've got a positive,
then a negative. The velocity is positive, the acceleration is negative, they're going
in opposite directions to begin with. Between 2 and 3, let's try 2.5, now they're both negative.
Looks like the acceleration ended up winning here, so the velocity is negative and the
acceleration is negative. Pick something between 3 and 4, maybe 3.5. Now notice the velocity
is negative, but the acceleration has changed to positive, so the velocity is still negative,
but the acceleration is now pulling it in the positive direction. Finally, bigger than
4, we can pick any number bigger than 4, I picked 5, we see they're both positive, so
now the velocity is positive and the acceleration is positive, and it's going to stay that way
all the way up to infinity. So we see initially the velocity is positive, the acceleration
is negative, they're in opposite directions, it's going to slow down there. Between 2 and
3 they're in the same direction, it's going to speed up. Between 3 and 4 they're in opposite
directions, slowing down, and then 4 on up it's going to speed up. So writing that as
a range, we're speeding up between 2 and 3, union from 4 to infinity, and we're slowing
down from 0 to 2, union from 3 to 4, this particle is actually slowing down to ultimately
change directions. So that's one application of the derivative, position, velocity, acceleration,
speeding up, and slowing down. A second application that we're going to take a look at is in business,
with the idea of revenue, cost, profit, and what are called marginal changes. When we
say a marginal change in business, that is the change for revenue, cost, profit, and what
are called marginal changes. When we say a marginal change in business, that is the change
for one more. And usually this is on the large scale, so once I make 1,000 widgets, if I make
one more widget, 1,001 widgets, is it more profitable or less profitable, more cost, less cost,
making one more, how's that going to affect my bottom line? And that can help us make
the decision if it's worth expanding or shrinking the business at this given time. Because we're
talking about change, a marginal change, which is a very small change, we are going to make
one more, one more, one more, one more, one more, one more, one more, one more, one more,
we can estimate the marginal change with the derivative. Let's break down some of these
business terms. We've got cost, which we normally represent with c of x, and we've got marginal
cost. For marginal cost, we do m c of x for marginal cost, which is actually estimated,
not actually, but estimated by the derivative of the cost function. We've also got revenue.
Revenue, we usually use r of x for revenue, and often we have to find that because what
we actually have is some price function that needs to be multiplied by the number of things
that we sell. So if the price is $5 and we sell $7, 5 times 7, we've made $21 in revenue.
This price function, the price per item, is often a function because the price is going
to be dependent on various variables. So we've got the revenue, and we've also got marginal
revenue, and as you might expect, we use mr for marginal revenue of x, which can be estimated
using the derivative of the revenue. Finally, what we're always interested in in business
is the profit. The profit is p of x, which is simply calculated by taking the revenue
or the amount of money we took in and subtracting the cost that it took to bring in that money.
And we also have a marginal profit, or how much more money do we make for selling one
more? So marginal profit of x, as you might expect, is equal to the derivative of the
profit at x. So those are kind of the parts of the profit function. Let's take a look
at some examples and see if we can wrap our head around what is this marginal profit, marginal
cost, and marginal revenue. First, the cost of the profit is p of x, which is equal to
to develop a product is c of x is equal to 500 plus 12x. Startup cost of 500, and then
each one costs $12. You want to know what is the marginal cost
of the 100 first item. Now, a nice way to estimate the marginal cost of x is to simply
take the derivative of the cost function. Well, this is really nice because the derivative
of 500 plus 12x is just 12. So we will estimate that the 12th item will cost 12 extra dollars.
I'm sorry, the 100th item will cost 12 extra dollars because every single one we add to
it costs 12 extra dollars. That is probably a less exciting example. So let's try a price
function. The price function for the product, same product, is p equals 126 minus 0.16 x.
We want to know what is the marginal revenue for the 100 first item. So first we need
to know what is the revenue function. Remember, revenue is always x times the price function.
The number of things we sell times the price for each one of those. That is 126 minus 0.16x.
If I distribute to make the derivative easier, 126x minus 0.16x squared. So then the marginal
revenue of x is pretty darn close to the derivative of the revenue. So that is 126 minus 0.32x.
So that is 126 minus 0.32x. And we want to know the marginal revenue of the 100 first
item. So we can plug 101 into this function to estimate it. 126 minus 0.32 times 101.
And quickly typing that in my calculator we will get 93 dollars and 68 cents. Which means
after I've sold 100 items the 101st item is going to make me another 93 dollars and 68
cents. Or so. How accurate is that estimate? Because remember I did say it is an estimate.
Let's find out. Note the actual. Because the derivative is just an estimate, it's going
to be off by a bit. Because the tangent line touches at 100. But not necessarily at 101,
it's off by a little bit. So we could calculate the revenue at 100. How much revenue we've
already made at 100? So the revenue equation was 126 times 100 minus 0.16 times 100 squared.
And plug that into my calculator we actually make $11,000. The revenue at 101 is 126 times
101 minus 0.16 times 101 squared. We make $11,093.84. And so if we want the marginal revenue that
is how much more we made for the 101st item. We subtract these. 11,093.84 minus 11,000.
We actually get 93 dollars and 84 cents is the actual marginal revenue. The 101st item
actually brings us in 93.84. But much quicker with the derivative we estimated 93.68 which
is pretty darn close and probably good enough for this business to make a decision based
on. We're not going to care about less than about 15 cents, 16 cents of a difference when
we're trying to make decisions on our product whether to expand or contract. So that's why
it's always better to use the derivative because it's quicker, it's easier, it's clearer
to understand. The actuals just take too long to calculate and really don't make much of
a difference. So we've done costs and we've done revenue. Let's add one more though. What's
the marginal profit? For the 101st item.
Well, remember P of X, the profit is equal to the revenue function minus the cost function.
And the revenue function, we've got it up here above on part B. It's 126X minus 0.16X
squared minus the cost function which was given to us up here in part A, 500 plus 12X.
So distributing that minus, because we have to subtract the whole thing, minus 500 minus
12X. And then actually combining like terms we get negative 0.16X squared plus 0.16X
114X minus 16X. Oops, minus 500. Keep things in the right order. And so if we want the
marginal profit, we take the derivative. The marginal profit of X is equal to the derivative
of the profit function which is negative 0.32X plus 114. And then we get the marginal profit
and we want the marginal profit of the 101st item. So plugging 101 in there, negative 0.32
times 101 plus 114. If we were to make one more item, we would make an additional $81.68
our marginal profit. I want to make a difference in the marginal profit.
We want to do one more application of the derivative based on where we're at right now.
And that is in population change. Truth is anytime you see the word change, we're really
dealing with a derivative in action. Anything that changes is the derivative. So with population
change, if we use P of t to represent the population at time t, then the derivative
P prime of t is the rate of change of the population. And so if we use P of t to represent
the population, so for example, if I have a bacteria population that is growing according
to the function, P of t is equal to X cubed. So if I have a bacteria population that is
cubed minus 18 X squared plus 96 X plus 20, where t is in hours, when is the population
growing and shrinking. And so if we use P of t to represent the population at time t,
we want to know when it's growing and shrinking, we're talking about the derivative. We're
talking about the change. So the change in the population, P prime of t, the derivative
of that function is 3 X squared minus 36 X plus 96. And where the change happens between
growth and shrinking, growth the derivative is positive because it's going up. Shrinking
the derivative is negative, it's going down. So it changes when the derivative is equal
to zero. So zero equals 3 X squared minus 36 X plus 96. And we know we can solve this
by factoring. Factor out the GCF of 3 times X squared minus 12 X plus 32. Zero equals
3 times X minus 8 and X minus 4. I probably should have t's not X's because it's P of
t. I'll change to P of X then it works. P of X. So X is equal to 8 and 4 hours. So
at 8 and 4 things are changing. So if we got a timeline here, at 4 things change and at
8 things change. What is happening with P prime of X? What is happening to the derivative?
Are we increasing or decreasing? Is the derivative positive or negative? So again we'll go to
our calculator, hit Y equals, clear out these other formulas, and our population is changing
according to 3 X squared minus 36 X plus 96. And if we hit second table, we can try out
a few values for time and see if this is, the derivative is positive or negative. If
it's positive it's increasing. If it's negative it's decreasing. Between 0 and 4 we'll try
2. We see it's positive. Between 4 and 8 we'll try 5. Negative. Bigger than 8, 9. It's positive.
So it goes positive, negative, positive. Positive, negative, positive. So what that means is
the population is growing wherever the derivative is positive. Between 0 and 4 hours, union,
and then from 8 to infinite hours it's never going to stop growing. And it's shrinking in
between 4 and 8 hours because the derivative is negative. So we're talking about population,
business, and physics with velocity and acceleration. A couple key applications of the derivative. We'll
talk about more as the course develops, but that's enough to get you going for now. We
will see you in class to dive into these a little bit deeper. Up until now we've avoided
really talking about trigonometric functions and the derivatives. So today we're going
to attempt to answer the question of what are the derivatives of the trig functions,
sine, cosine, tangent, and also the less used ones of cosecant, secant, and cotangent.
And to begin setting this up we're going to look at the graph of f of x equals sine x.
And you'll remember from your days of trigonometry it has a maximum of 1 and a minimum at negative
1. And then at pi over 2, pi, 3 pi over 2, and 2 pi, things get excited. So we're going
to go in the other direction, same thing, negative pi over 2, negative pi, negative 3 pi over
2, and negative 2 pi. And if you remember the sine of x starts at 0, it reaches a maximum
at pi over 2, back to 0, minimum at 3 pi over 2, and back to 0, doing kind of the same
exact thing in the opposite direction when we are on the other side. So the sine of x
is this familiar graph. If that's the sine of x, then what I want to graph next to it
is see if we can graph the derivative of the sine of x.
Using kind of the same scale we had before with pi over 2, pi, 3 pi over 2, 2 pi, negative
pi over 2, negative pi, negative 3 pi over 2, and negative 2 pi. And what I want to
notice as we graph the derivative, f prime of x, as we graph the derivative I want to
notice first off where the derivative is 0. Notice the derivative is 0 at negative 3
pi over 2, it's 0 at negative pi over 2, it's 0 at positive pi over 2, and it's 0 at 3 pi
over 2. And also I want to notice it starts out increasing, starts out increasing, starts
out increasing from the negative 2 pi up to the 0. So that means it's going to start
positive down to our negative 3 pi over 2. Then it's decreasing, meaning our derivative
is negative up until it reaches pi over 2. Then we're going uphill and we're positive
again up until the graph equals pi over 2, then decreasing all the way until we equal
3 pi over 2, then increasing or positive all the way up to 2 pi. And so we end up with
this derivative graph, and what's interesting is this derivative graph should look familiar
to us. Notice at 0 it starts at 1 and it's got the same shape as our familiar cosine,
cosine of x function. So in other words what we've discovered here is that the derivative
of sine appears at least from the graph to be the cosine of x. Well let's take the derivative
of this graph, just a little too tall, want to have room for a label, and doing the same
thing now. Oops, let's try that again. Let's see if we get something else familiar when
we take the second derivative, f prime prime of x, or the derivative of cosine to see what
we end up with here. Let's label here we've got negative pi over 2, negative pi, negative
3 pi over 2, and negative 2 pi. Going the other direction we have pi over 2, pi, 3 pi over
2, and 2 pi. And again noticing where the derivative is 0 at negative 2 pi, it's 0 at
negative pi, it's 0 at 0, and it's 0 at pi, and again it's going to be 0 at 2 pi. But
this time the graph starts out decreasing, which means it has to start off negative.
So it's going to start off negative up until it reaches the negative pi. Then between the
zeroes it's increasing, so the derivative has to be positive until it reaches the 0, decreasing,
indicating the derivative is negative, and then increasing, indicating the derivative
is positive, up until the 0. Now what we might hope is that there's this relationship
that the derivative of sine is cosine and the derivative of cosine is sine, but that's
not quite the case because sine starts out increasing, this one starts out decreasing.
It's actually flipped over the x-axis from the sine graph. In other words this red graph
here is actually the graph of negative sine of x. And so really what we found is that
the derivative of the sine of x is equal to the cosine of x, and that the derivative
of the cosine of x turned out to be the negative sine of x, at least graphically. So can we
use that information then to learn what the derivative is of the tangent of x? Well what's
nice about the tangent is we know that tangent is actually the sine of x divided by the cosine.
Of x, we have that property from trig, which means really all we have to do is use the
quotient rule. The derivative of sine, we said was cosine x, times the denominator, cosine
x, minus the derivative of the denominator, the derivative of cosine is negative sine,
negative negative makes it positive, times the numerator which is the sine of x, all
over the denominator, squared. So what we have really is cosine squared of x, plus sine
squared of x, all over cosine squared of x, but that numerator should look really familiar
to us. We should recognize from our trig days that sine squared plus cosine squared is
one. So we have one over cosine squared of x, but cosine is just the reciprocal of secant,
and so we end up with secant squared of x. The derivative of tangent is secant squared.
Well similar to what we just did with the tangent of x and using the quotient rule,
we can work our way through all the other trig derivatives, so similarly we complete all
the trig derivatives. In fact, the remaining three are left to a homework assignment, but
here they are in their properties. The derivative of the sine of x is equal to the cosine of x,
the derivative of the cosine of x is the negative sine of x, the derivative of the tangent
of x is the secant squared of x. Those are the ones we just played with, but the other
three which are left to an exercise in the homework, the derivative of the secant of
x, turns out to be the secant of x times the tangent of x, the derivative of the reciprocal
of cosine, or the derivative of the reciprocal of sine, which is cosecant of x, is negative
cosecant of x, cotangent of x, and the derivative of the cotangent of x is equal to negative
cosecant squared of x. These six trig identities, at least sine and cosine you should have memorized,
but ultimately we're going to have to be able to use all six of these trig derivatives.
Six important formulas for us to learn. That's what we're going to focus on today. Actually
that's all there is that's new. We can just combine all of this with things like our
product rule, our quotient rule, our polynomial rules, and calculate a whole bunch of derivatives.
So let's see if we can use these in a couple examples.
First we're going to look at f of x equals three x to the fourth sine of x plus seven
over x. Now one thing you might notice is that seven over x we can rewrite. So let's
rewrite it as three x to the fourth sine x plus seven x to the negative one so we can
use our polynomial formulas. And then we'll start calculating the derivative of f of x.
First thing I notice is we really have a product rule to start us off. We've got three x to
the fourth times the sine of x. So to do the product rule we take the derivative of the
first which is twelve x cubed times the second sine of x plus the derivative of the second
the derivative of sine is cosine x times the first and I'll just put it in front to make
it obvious that it's not inside the cosine. And then after the product rule we still have
to take care of the plus seven x to the negative one. Seven times negative one is negative seven
x to the negative two and we've got our derivative. Let's try another one that might be a little
more involved. Let's say f of x is equal to the cosine of x minus x to the fifth times
the cotangent of x plus the secant of x. Now it should be clear here we're working with
a product. Two pieces multiplied together so we have to do the product rule for f prime
of x for the derivative. So we'll take the derivative of the first term or the first
factor. The derivative of cosine x is negative sine x minus x to the fifth becomes five
x to the fourth times the second cotangent x plus secant of x plus the derivative of
the second. The derivative of cotangent is negative cosecant squared of x plus the derivative
of secant is secant x tangent x and then we have to multiply by the first part, the cosine
x minus x to the fifth. And we've got our derivative. One more for this video.
f of x is equal to tangent of x minus three x to the fourth over cosecant of x minus seven.
Now we're dividing two functions. With division we know we need to use the quotient rule just
like we always have before. The quotient rule says we take the derivative of the top. The
derivative of tangent we now know is secant squared of x minus three times four is twelve
x cubed. The derivative of the top times the bottom cosecant x minus seven minus the derivative
of the bottom. The derivative of cosecant is negative cosecant, so a negative negative
makes it positive, cosecant x cotangent x times the numerator times the first part. Tangent
x minus three x to the fourth. And that's all over the denominator squared, cosecant
x minus seven squared. So today's video is really short because there's not a lot of
new stuff to add. All we have now is we've added the six trig derivatives, and then we
kind of tie them into all the other derivative rules that we've seen before. The quotient
rule, the product rule, the polynomial rules, and just continue to practice taking these
important derivatives. With calculus and derivatives, practice, practice, practice is the key until
you can do these derivatives in your sleep. So go ahead and try some of these off the
homework assignment. This video is shorter to give you more time to get into the practice,
and we'll dive into these more in class. I'll look forward to seeing you then.
Quite often when we're trying to find the derivative of a function, we find that we
actually have a composite function, or a function inside a function. And so that's the question
we're going to address today is how do we take a derivative of a composite function?
A function inside of a function. And really the short answer to that is we use something
that is called the chain rule, which officially is written that the derivative of a function
with another function inside it is equal to the derivative of the outside function, which
is where the inside stays the same. Actually, I should use square brackets there, times
the derivative of the inside function. So in words, it's probably easier to remember
the chain rule is we take the derivative of the outside times the derivative of the outside
of the inside. And that's what we're going to take a look at today. I've got seven examples
where we basically do this process over and over again. We take the derivative of the
outside times the derivative of the inside. But this chain rule is one that you should
be very comfortable with completing, working through, in order to take derivatives. So
let's take a look at some examples where we take the derivative of the outside times the
derivative of the inside. Let's say we've got a function f of x equals one over 4x minus
seven cubed. Now one thing I notice with this to make it easier to remember is that
it's really easier to take the derivative. We could use the quotient rule, but that's
just way too much work for what we need to do, because we've just got a one in the numerator.
This is really 4x minus seven with a negative three exponent, because the negative exponent
makes it a reciprocal one over that. So what we see we've actually got here is the 4x
minus three as a block is all raised to the negative three power. If this was just x to
the negative three, we know the derivative of that is negative three x to the negative
four. So that's kind of what we're going to do here, but we're going to use the 4x minus
seven in place of that x. So we pull the exponent out front, and f prime of x is equal to negative
three times the base, the 4x minus seven, all to the negative four power. Now the only
thing we have to do is multiply by the derivative of the inside, and the derivative of 4x minus
seven is just four. We'll clean that up a bit. Let's see the negative three times four
is negative twelve, so we've got negative twelve times 4x minus seven to the negative
four power as our final derivative. But the idea here is we identified that we've got
that 4x minus seven inside another function, which is the x to the negative three. So we
took the derivative of the outside times the derivative of the inside. So let's look at
another one. Let's say we had f of x equals the square root of 3x squared minus seven
x plus one. Now again, we recognize square root is really an exponent. We've really got
3x squared minus 7x plus one to the one half power. And so what we need to recognize here
is we have a function inside of a function. What we really have is the 3x squared minus
7x plus one, that function sitting inside a one half power. In other words, this is kind
of the same idea as if we had x to the one half power. We know how to take the derivative
of x to the one half power, that's one half x to the negative one half, bringing the x
exponent out front and then reducing the exponent by one. The only difference is instead of
having an x, we're going to have the 3x squared minus 7x plus one. So our derivative is we
pull the exponent out front, it's one half times the stuff, 3x squared minus 7x plus
one, and then we reduce the exponent by one, giving us negative one half. The only thing
we have to do in addition is multiply by the derivative of what's inside. The derivative
of 3x squared minus 7x plus one is 6x minus seven, and there we have our final answer.
The only thing we might want to do is clean up a bit because we've got that negative
exponent in a fraction going on. I'll leave the 6x minus seven in the numerator, the two
is in a denominator, and the 3x squared minus 7x plus one with the negative exponent moves
down. That just cleans it up, it's not really a needed step, but it does make it a little
prettier. But now we have our derivative. Let's try to increase in complexity a little
bit as we continue working through these problems. Let's go to a trig problem. What if we have
f of x equals the cosine of 5x squared? What if we have the cosine of 5x squared?
With this one, what you notice is we have got the 5x squared sitting inside of a cosine.
So we'll take the derivative of the outside times the derivative of the inside. The derivative
of cosine is, let's mark this as f prime of x equals, the derivative of cosine is negative
sine of the stuff, 5x squared, and then we multiply by the derivative of the inside,
which is 10x. Clean this up a little bit and we'll move the 10x to the front so we just
see negative 10x sine of 5x squared, and we've got r.
The derivative of the outside times the derivative of the inside. What about this one? f of x
equals secant squared of x. What's the outside and what's the inside function?
Another way to think about secant squared of x is, that's really secant of x squared.
So actually our inside function is the secant of x. The outside function is that we're squaring
it. So we're going to take the derivative of the outside times the derivative of the inside
the outside function is that we're squaring it. So if we're squaring it, we know we bring
for f prime of x, we bring the exponent out front, and then reduce the exponent by 1.
And we multiply by the derivative of the inside. The derivative of secant is secant
tangent. Just to clean this up a bit, secant times secant is secant squared. So we have
two secant squared x tangent x. And we've got r derivative. And then we're going to
try another one. How about if we had f of x is equal to cosecant of 3x squared minus
5x? Again, we've got a function inside of a function. Identifying what's inside of
the inside is the 3x squared minus 5x. So we'll take the derivative of the outside times
the derivative of the inside. And the derivative of cosecant is negative cosecant cotangent.
So we have f prime of x equals negative cosecant of the stuff 3x squared minus 5x times the
cotangent of the stuff 3x squared minus 5x times the derivative of the inside. Well
the derivative of the inside using our power rule is 6x minus 5. There's not much to clean
up on this one. The only thing we might be able to do is move the 6x minus 5 to the front
so it's really clear that that part is not part of the cotangent or cosecant. So we have
negative 6x minus 5, don't lose the parenthesis, cosecant of 3x squared minus 5, cotangent
of 3x squared minus 5. And we've found r derivative. And we've found r derivative.
To make these a little more exciting, we can combine different rules together to find derivatives.
Number 6 is an example of this, where we have f of x equals 4x plus 5 cubed times 2x squared
minus 6x plus 1 to the seventh power. This one is a little bit more complicated.
This problem is going to combine the chain rule along with the product rule. So we see
we're working with a product, but the product is of functions within functions. On the
left side we see 4x plus 5 is inside the cube function. On the right side we see 2x squared
minus 6x plus 1 is inside the seventh power function. So let's use our product rule along
with our chain rule in order to find the derivative. The product rule says we take the derivative
of the first part times the second part. So the derivative of the first part, we bring
the exponent out front, 3 times 4x plus 5, reduce the exponent by 1, so it's squared.
And then we multiply by the derivative of the inside, which is just 4. Then that's the
derivative of the first part, we still need to multiply by the second part, 2x squared
minus 6x plus 1 to the seventh power. Plus, now the product rule says we take the derivative
of the second part times the first part. The second part is a chain rule again, we bring
the 7 out front times 2x squared minus 6x plus 1. Now to the sixth power, because we've
reduced the exponent by 1, times the derivative of the inside. The inside has a derivative
of 4x minus 6, and that part is the derivative of the second part. We still have to multiply
by the first part, which is 4x plus 5, cubed. From here, there's just a little bit of cleanup.
I'm going to multiply 3 times 4 to get 12 times 4x plus 5 squared times 2x squared minus
6x plus 1 to the seventh power. The second part doesn't really have any cleanup to do,
so we'll just keep that all the same, 7 times 2x squared minus 6x plus 1 to the sixth power
times 4x minus 6 times 4x plus 5 cubed. That big ugly thing is the derivative of our function.
Notice to get that derivative, we had to combine both the chain rule and the product rule.
We knew the product rule was the derivative of the first times the second, plus the derivative
of the second times the first, but in order to take those derivatives in each of those
parts, we had to use the chain rule, where we took the derivative of the outside times
the derivative of the inside. We not only can combine the chain rule with other rules,
we can combine the chain rule with the chain rule. If we've got functions inside of functions,
we can just keep applying the chain rule, taking the derivative of the outside times the derivative
of the inside, times the derivative of what's inside that, times the derivative of what's
inside that, until we run out of things to take the derivative of. For our final example,
if f of x is equal to the tangent cubed of 5x squared minus 7 times the derivative of
x, what you'll see we have here, and maybe we should rewrite, remember tangent cubed
means we really have the tangent of 5x squared minus 7 to the third power. So we've got
a tangent inside of cubed, but then we've also got a 5x squared minus 7 times the derivative
of 7 inside of the tangent, and those colors are overlapping, making it very difficult
to see, but you get the idea. So we're going to first take the derivative of the outside
function, which is cubed. So for the derivative of a cubed, we pull the 3 outside, and reduce
the exponent by 1, now it's tangent squared of 5x squared minus 7. Then we take the derivative
of the inside, well the derivative of tangent is the secant squared of the inside stuff,
5x squared minus 7. But we're still not done, because we can take the derivative of the
inside stuff, which is going to be the 5x squared minus 7, the derivative of that is
just 10x. Cleaning up a little bit, 3 times 10 is 30, so f prime of x is equal to the
30x tangent squared of 5x squared minus 7 times secant squared of 5x squared minus 7.
And now we've got our derivative, which required us to use the chain rule on the chain rule,
which all we do is just start peeling off layers, like peeling the layers off an onion,
derivative of the outside, times the derivative of what's in that, times the derivative of
what's in that, times the derivative of what's in that, until we finally reach the end.
So that's the chain rule, the chain rule is we just keep taking derivatives and multiplying
until we reach the far inside of our function. This video is a little bit shorter because
it's going to give you time to practice this on your own before you come to class, and
then we'll dive into it a little deeper in class and answer any questions. I'll look
forward to seeing you then, so that we can work on the chain rule.
As we continue to work with derivatives, we want to continue to expand the types of functions
we can take the derivative of, and there's another one that we've missed, and that is
the inverse trig functions. So the question we're going to answer is what are the derivatives
of the inverse trig functions?
And before we can actually answer the question about what are the derivatives of the inverse
trig functions, we really have to understand how derivatives of inverses work.
And there's a nice little theorem that says that if f inverse of x is equal to x, then
is the inverse of f of x, then the derivative of f inverse at x is simply the reciprocal
of the derivative at that inverse point. Maybe a better way to say that is the inverse
point is to say that that's not so mathematical is if a comma b is a point on f of x, then
the slope of the tangent line,
is f prime of a. We stick that x coordinate into the derivative. We already know that
though, that's just our basic definition of the slope of a tangent line that we've been
working with thus far. So if a b is a point on f of x, then b comma a, switching the x
and y coordinates, is on f inverse of x, and the slope is on f inverse of x, and the slope
of the tangent line is, and it turns out to be, just the reciprocal of the slope of the
standard function. So the slope of the inverse is the reciprocal of the slope of the function.
We'll say 1 over f prime of a, and that's probably an important slope of the slope of
the slope to know 1 over the derivative at that point. So let's take a look at how we
can do some of these reciprocals of slopes or derivatives to calculate some tangent lines
on inverse functions. So for example, we're going to find the equation for the slope of
a tangent line of the inverse of f of x equals x cubed minus 7x plus 5 at 5.
So we're going to break this down into three parts. First, it's really important as we're
talking about this, we keep track of our five, is that the x coordinate or the y coordinate
of the function or of the inverse, because the function and the inverse have the same
x and y coordinates, they're just switched and backwards, and it's really easy to get
those confused. So let's take a moment to really clearly say that 5 is the x coordinate
of the inverse. We're finding the equation of the tangent line of the inverse at 5. So
5 is the x coordinate of the inverse, which means it is the y or the f of x for the ratio
function. Maybe I should say y for the f of x. So it's the x of the inverse and it's
the y for the function, which means we need to still find the other coordinate, the x
of the f of x. So if f of x is x cubed minus 7x plus 5, then we're going to find the x
of 5, and 5 is that y coordinate, this is like saying it equals 5. And we can solve this
really quickly for x. We'll subtract 5 from both sides to make it equal to 0, x cubed
minus 7x equals 0, factoring out the x from both sides, and then subtracting out the x
of both terms, we get x squared minus 7 equals 0. Let's scroll down a little more here, give
me some more space. And we'll set each factor equal to 0, so x equals 0, and x squared minus
7 equals 0. So x is equal to plus or minus the square root of 7. So we've got three
possible values for our x coordinate to make the y coordinate 5, 0, square root of 7, or
negative square root of 7. In fact, let's clearly state that on f of x, the point we're
talking about is 0, 5, square root of 7, 5, and negative square root of 7, 5, and negative
square root of 7, 5. We've got three points, which means on the inverse, we're talking
about the opposites, 5, 0, 5, square root of 7, and 5, negative square root of 7. Keeping
track of what's x, what's y on which function. Probably the most challenging part of this
section is keeping track of what is what. Next thing we're ready to do is, now that we
know what our x and y coordinates are that we're working with, we still need to find
the slope of the tangent line of f of x, because we know that the slope of the tangent line
of the inverse is just the reciprocal of this slope. Just because it's off my screen,
I'm going to write the function again x cubed minus 7x plus 5, so that we can take the derivative
at 3x squared minus 7. We need to find the slope at each of the three points, at each
of the three x coordinates that we just found. We're going to find f prime of 0, f prime
of the square root of 7, and f prime of negative square root of 7. We're going to have 3 because
we're dealing with three points. I think the homework assignment specifies a specific
range, so you're only doing one of the points, but the process is the same. Let's take the
extra practice. First, plugging 0 into the derivative, we have 3 times 0 squared minus
7, and that's just going to equal negative 7. Plugging square root of 7 in, we've got
3 times the square root of 7 squared minus 7. That's 3 times 7, or 21 minus 7, and that's
equal to 14. Really similar with the negative square root of 7, because squaring a negative
is the same as squaring the positive, so we've got 3 times 7, or 21 minus 7 is 14. Now we can make the equations of the tangent line.
Remember, with f inverse, we have to switch coordinates, because x is y and y is x on the inverse. We
also have to do the reciprocal slopes. We're going to have to do the reciprocal slope.
For our first point, let's see if I can get the points on the screen here. On the inverse,
the first point was 5 comma 0, and at that point we found the slope was equal to negative
1 seventh, the reciprocal of the negative 7. We have y equals negative 1 seventh times
x minus 5 plus the 0. That's the equation of the tangent line at 5-0. What if we wanted
to do it at 5 square root of 7? Actually, let's do this in a different color, just to
keep the different colors separate. Second point was 5 square root of 7. There the slope
is the reciprocal of 14, or 1 over 14. We have y equals 1 14th times x minus 5 plus
the square root of 7. We had a third point. Our third point was at 5 comma negative square
root of 7. That slope is going to be the reciprocal of 14, which is 1 over 14. For that equation,
we've got y equals 1 14th times x minus 5 minus the square root of 7.
Now we've got our three tangent lines that are tangent at an x coordinate of 5 to paint
on the y coordinate, because this inverse isn't actually a function. We probably should
have restricted the domain, but it provided us the chance to practice three times with
this process of finding the slope of the tangent line to the function, knowing the inverse
is the reciprocal slope. Let's try one more example that uses this idea before we get
to trig. How about this example? The point 4 comma 1 is 4 comma 1 minus 4 over 4.
It is on the inverse of f of x equals x to the 5th minus 3x squared plus 4 squared.
Find the equation of the tangent line. We know that the tangent line is going to have
the reciprocal slope of the function's tangent line slope. Let's find the function's tangent
line slope, f prime of x equals, this is a chain rule here. We'll take the derivative
of the outside, which is 2 times x to the 5th minus 3x squared plus 4 times the derivative
of the inside, which is 5x to the 4th minus 6x. Remember, 4 1 is on the inverse of x
to the 5th minus 6x. The point we want that's on the standard function before the inverse
is actually reversed. It's actually 1 comma 4. We want to make our x equal to 1 because
we're dealing with the standard function, not its inverse. F prime of 1 is equal to 2 times
1 to the 5th minus 3 times 1 squared plus 4 times 5 times 1 to the 4th minus 5 times
6 times 1. Maybe use a calculator to do that real quick.
1 is nice because it's not going to do anything exciting when we multiply it or when we do
exponents with it. We've got 2 times 1 to the 5th, which is just 1 minus 3 times 1 squared,
which is just 3 plus 4. Close the parentheses, then we have 5 times 1 to the 4th, which is
just 5 minus 6 times 1, which is just 6. We get this nice slope of negative 4.
If that's the slope of the function at 1, the slope at the inverse, at the alternative
coordinates, the slope of the inverse that we're going for is negative 1 fourth, and
the point we're working with is 4 comma 1. We just go straight to our equation, y equals
negative 1 fourth times x minus 4 plus 1. That's going to go through the point 4, 1.
It's on the inverse of its tangent to the inverse of our function.
But the original question that we're dealing with had to do with the inverse of the trig
functions, so we haven't touched any trig functions yet. Let's see if we can use what
we've just learned about inverses to find the derivatives of the inverse trig functions.
To set this up, I want to consider f of x equals sine x. If we want the inverse of
sine x, we remember from our trig days, we call that just the sine inverse of x, and
it's really important to note that that negative 1 is not an exponent. It's not an exponent.
That doesn't mean sine to the negative 1 power. That means the inverse sine of x. It might
be called the arc sine of x. Using what we know, then what we know about inverses is
we can find the derivative of the inverse using the derivative of the standard function.
The derivative of the standard function, f prime of x, the derivative of sine is cosine
of x. And we know that the derivative of an inverse is equal to 1 over the derivative
of the functions inverse. So in our case, that's going to be 1 over f prime. The derivative
is cosine of the inverse function, which is sine inverse of x. And if we think back to
our trig days, we remember to find sine inverse of x. We say, hey, well, we've got a triangle,
cosine of the sine inverse. We've got a triangle. We like to make the radius equal to 1. And
we want the sine inverse of x. So sine inverse of x. So we're talking about x. So the opposite
over the hypotenuse is the sine. Opposite over the hypotenuse is x. So x over 1 is x.
And then using the Pythagorean theorem, the other side has to be 1 minus x squared, the
square root of all of that. So that's our triangle for the sine inverse of x. We want
to take the cosine of that. And cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse. The adjacent over
the hypotenuse, in this case, is the square root over 1, which is just the square root.
And so we end up with 1 over the square root of 1 minus x squared. 1 over the square root
of 1 minus x squared, then, is the derivative of the inverse sine. And so we end up with
using this exact same process, we can actually find the derivative of all the inverse sine
function, or inverse trig functions. So similarly, we get the derivatives of the inverse trig
functions. We get the derivatives of the inverse trig functions. Six inverse trig functions.
The derivative of sine inverse of x, we just found out that that was 1 over the square
root of 1 minus x squared. Similarly, the derivative of cosine inverse of x turns out
to be negative 1 over the square root of 1 minus x squared. And the derivative of tangent
inverse of x, using the same process, will be 1 over 1 plus x squared. And so we get
and then we can find the derivative of the reciprocals. The reciprocal of sine is cosecant.
Its derivative is negative 1 over the absolute value of x times the square root of x squared
minus 1. The derivative of secant inverse of x is 1 over the absolute value of x times
the square root of x squared minus 1. And the derivative of cotangent inverse of x is
negative 1 over 1 plus x squared. So you've got six more important derivatives.
To add to your list of derivatives. Nice part about these is if you know your trig
well enough, you should be able to derive them all using our inverse formula that we
just found. Or you can memorize them, which comes quite naturally out of just trying a
few of these over and over again in practice. So let's do just that. Let's do two examples
where we're finding the derivatives of the inverse trig functions. Let's say f of x equals
the cosine inverse of x squared. We're dealing with a chain rule here. We've got x squared
inside the cosine inverse. So let's see how that comes out. The derivative of cosine inverse
is negative 1 over the square root of 1 minus x squared. But x squared is in there, so we've
got x squared squared. x squared squared is x to the fourth. Knowing that we multiply
those exponents times the derivative of the inside. The derivative of x squared is 2x.
And since that's really 2x over 1, we can simplify to get negative 2x over the square
root of 1 minus x to the fourth. So we've got x squared times the derivative of x squared
Let's try another one. Let's say f of x equals the square root of x times the secant inverse
of x. By this point in our study of calculus, when we see that square root of x, we should
immediately know to change that to x to the one half power so that we can use our exponent
properties. So we have x to the one half secant inverse of x. And let's start taking the derivative
using the product rule because we're dealing with a product. So the derivative of the first
is one half times x to the negative one half times the second, which is secant inverse
of x. Plus the derivative of the second part, the derivative of secant inverse is 1 over
the absolute value of x times the square root of x squared minus 1. So we're going to
use 1 over the absolute value of x times the square root of x squared minus 1 times the
first, which is x to the one half. Let's clean that up a little bit. Let's go ahead
and use our negative exponents. The one half means we've got a 2 in the denominator, x
to the one half sticks the square root of x in the denominator. Now be careful with secant
inverse. That is not secant to the negative one power. That is not a negative exponent.
That's an inverse trig function. So we'll put the secant inverse of x in the numerator.
Plus x to the one half, that's really the square root of x in the numerator. Absolute
value of x times the square root of x squared minus 1. And now we've got the derivative
of that function. So we did a little bit of work today with inverse functions, but the
big idea that I want you to be able to pull out of this lesson is how to take the derivative
of the inverse functions using these six derivative properties. We'll also do a little bit of
work with inverses in general, but the bulk is going to be here on the trig derivatives.
Practice a few of these. We will see you in class to dive into them a little bit deeper.
Now that we're able to use the chain rule in order to calculate more complex derivatives,
we are actually ready to answer a deeper question about finding derivatives. And that's for
finding derivatives around functions, or not functions, but relations between x and y that
are more complex than a function. This would include things like circles, ellipses, hyperbolas,
or more complex graphs and non-functions that do not pass the vertical line test. So the
question is going to be how do we take the derivative of x squared minus 1 over x squared
if it is not a function of x? In other words, it's going to fail the vertical line test.
It's not a function, and everything we've done thus far has been all predicated on the
idea of a function. And so what we're going to have to do is if it's not a function, we're
going to have to use what's called implicit differentiation. And so we're going to have
a function where y is a function of x, we don't know what it is, or it's too complex for
us to work with, and so we'll just take the derivative of y times the derivative of what's
inside it, and the derivative of y we know is just dy dx. So in summary, we can use the
chain rule with this idea that the derivative of y with respect to x is dy dx. But of course
dy dx is what we're trying to find. What is the derivative of y with respect to x? And
so what we will then do is we will then solve for dy dx, and generally dy dx will be a linear
function so we'll be able to get all the dy dx's on one side, factor out dy dx, and divide
by whatever it's multiplied by. But to get an idea of what this looks like, let's start
with a simple example. Just a basic circle with a radius of six has the equation x squared
plus y squared equals 36. And just kind of to draw a picture off to the side, we won't
normally do this, but just to get an idea of what we're talking about here is we've
got a circle with a radius of six, and the idea is that we could in theory calculate
we come up with a tangent line to this circle that touches at one point, and we could put
that tangent line anywhere on the circle. And so what we want to do is come up with
what is the equation of the slope of that tangent line? What is dy dx? But we can't
do it by our traditional means because this thing is not a function. It does not pass
the vertical line test because it's going to, a vertical line will cross the graph twice.
So because it doesn't pass the vertical line test, because it's not a function, we will
take the derivative implicitly, which means we're going to use this idea of the chain
rule whenever we come across the y. So first, the derivative of x squared is 2x, plus the
derivative of y squared. Now keep it in mind the chain rule, we're going to treat the y
like it's the inside stuff, and so the derivative of y squared is 2y, but we have to multiply
by the derivative of the inside, and the derivative of y is dy dx. Equals, we'll do the same thing
on the other side, the derivative of 36 is 0, and now I've got something that I can
solve for the dy dx. To solve for the dy dx, we'll subtract 2x from both sides, and we
have 2y dy dx equals negative 2x. Get the y by itself, or the dy dx, and we're going
to get dy dx by itself, by dividing by 2y, and we get negative 2x over 2y, or by reducing
out the 2s, we have dy dx is equal to negative x over y. So the slope of the tangent line
of this circle is negative x over y. We would then know from our point what x and y are,
and we'd be able to find the slope at any given point. Now that was a simple example.
These examples can quickly increase in complexity as we combine quotient rules and product rules
and chain rules and all the other rules we've seen. So let's try several of these examples.
We'll do two more examples where we're just solving for dy dx, and then we'll also look
at how we can find the equation of these tangent lines. So first we're going to look at x cubed
y squared minus the sine of x equals the tangent of y. To take the derivative implicitly,
because solving for y would be a headache, we'll take the derivative of the first part
here. We notice we've got a product, the x squared times the y squared, so we will use
the product rule. The derivative of x cubed is 3x squared times the second part, which
is y squared, plus the derivative of the second part, which is 2y dy dx, and I'll just put
that in parentheses so we can see what we're solving for, times the first part, which is
x cubed. Now that we've used the product rule, we keep going down our function. The derivative
of negative sine is negative cosine of x equals the derivative of tangent is secant square
of y, but times the derivative of the inside, whenever we take the derivative with the y,
we have to multiply by dy dx. Now we just have to solve for the dy dx. To do that, we're
going to get all the dy dx's on one side, so I'm going to move that 2y dy dx, that's
a terrible y, the 2y dy dx times x cubed, we're going to move that to the left side,
so we now have 3x squared, it should be green, 3x squared y squared minus the cosine of x
equals the secant squared of y times dy dx, minus 2y x cubed times the dy dx, and then
because the dy dx is on both terms, we're able to factor that out, dy dx times the secant
squared of y minus 2y x cubed, is still equal to, the other side's unchanged, 3x squared
y squared minus 2y x cubed, that's a terrible y, that's a terrible y, that's a terrible
cosine x. And so to get the dy dx alone, we just divide by everything, it's multiplied
by, and so now we can say that dy dx, the derivative or slope of the tangent line of
this relationship is 3x squared y squared minus cosine x divided by what was multiplied
by the dy dx, the secant squared y minus 2y x cubed, and that's how we can use this
idea of implicit differentiation, we just keep taking the derivative of both sides, and
then whenever we come across a y, we're going to multiply by the derivative of y using the
chain rule, which is dy dx. Let's look at another. Let's say we have xy plus x over y equals
y times the square root of 2x plus 1. One thing that's going to help us make this derivative
a little easier is the x over y, we can rewrite that y with a negative exponent, so we can
just use the product rule instead of the quotient rule, which is much simpler. Also the square
root, the easiest way to take a derivative with the square root is to change that to
a fractional exponent of 1 half, and then we can just use our exponent rules. So let's
rewrite this problem as xy plus xy to the negative 1 equals y times 2x plus 1 to the
1 half power. Now we're going to have to use several product rules here, so you want
to make sure you keep track of each part because we've got a product at the beginning, actually
let me do this in green so it stands out a little more. A product at the beginning,
a product in the middle, and a product at the end which is going to require us to use
the chain rule. So the first product, x times y, derivative of the first, the derivative
of x is 1 times y plus the derivative of the second, the derivative of y is dy dx times
the first, which is x, plus the derivative of x is 1 times the second, y to the negative
1 plus the derivative of the second, the derivative of y to the negative 1. We bring the negative
out front, so instead of plus we actually have minus y to the negative 2 times dy dx,
because we were taking a derivative with y times the first, which is x, equals, we have
another product. The derivative of the first part, the derivative of y is dy dx times the
second part, which is 2x plus 1 to the 1 half plus the derivative of the second part, which
is 1 half times 2x plus 1 to the negative 1 half. But now we have to use our chain rule
because the derivative of the 2x plus 1, the inside stuff, is 2. Now we can multiply
by the derivative, by the first part. Looking at this ugly thing that we have, a couple
of things to simplify, we've got a times 2 and a divide by 2, those are going to reduce
out, which is nice, so we don't have to deal with the fraction. Other than that, what we're
going to want to do is get all of these dy dx terms, there's one right here, dy dx times
x, we've got a negative y to the negative 2, dy dx times x, and we've also got x to
a dy dx multiplied by the 2x plus 1 to the 1 half. Let's move all the dy dx's to the
right and everything else to the left. So on the left we've still got the y plus y to
the negative 1, and then we'll subtract out that term at the end, the 2x plus 1 to the
negative 1 half times y, and I'm just going to put that y in front, equals, we've got
a dy dx multiplied by the 2x plus 1 to the 1 half. We have to also subtract off the dy
dx, which is multiplied by the x, and we're also going to add, to get rid of the minus,
a y to the negative 2x times dy dx. Now that we've got the dy dx's on the right,
the everything else on the left, we can factor out the dy dx, which leaves us with 2x plus
1 to the 1 half minus x plus y to the negative 2x. The other side's unchanged, y plus y
to the negative 1 minus y times 2x plus 1 to the negative 1 half. That's a terrible
2. There we go. And then finally we get the dy dx alone by dividing both sides by what
it's multiplied by, giving us y plus y to the negative 1 minus y times 2x plus 1 to the
negative 1 half, all over the 2x plus 1 to the 1 half, minus x plus y to the negative
2 times x. And now we have implicitly found that we've
found our derivative. Keeping along with this same idea, I want to add to it a little twist,
something we're very familiar with. And that is finding the equation of the tangent line.
So that equation of the tangent line, same idea, let's start with x cubed y plus 5x
squared y equals negative 28. And we're going to find the equation of the tangent line at
the point 2 comma negative 1. First we need to find the slope of the tangent line, and
then it's going to be really easy to find the actual equation. To find the slope we
take the derivative, we've got a couple products, we're getting really good at the product rule
here. So we've got 3x squared times y plus the derivative of y is dy dx times the x cubed
plus, for the second product, the derivative of the first part is 10x times the y plus
the derivative of the second, which is a dy dx times the first part, which is 5x squared
equals the derivative of negative 28 is just 0. Now solving for the dy dx's, they're all
on one side, which is nice, so we just need to get rid of the other stuff. So we've got
a dy dx times x cubed plus a dy dx times 5x squared is equal to negative 3x squared
y minus 10xy, moving those things without dy dx to the other side, so that we can factor
out the dy dx, leaving behind x cubed plus 5x squared plus 5x squared plus 5x squared
equals the negative 3x squared y minus 10xy. Now we can divide by what dy dx is multiplied
by, so we know that dy dx is equal to negative 3x squared y minus 10xy over the x cubed
plus 5x squared. We want that derivative at the point 2 comma negative 1, so we'll plug
2 in for all of these x's, we'll plug negative 1 in for the y's, so we have negative 3 times
x, which is 2 squared times y, which is negative 1, minus 10 times x, which is 2 times y, which
is negative 1, all over x cubed, x is 2 cubed plus 5x squared, which is 2 squared, and this
is not too bad to plug in to our handy dandy calculators. Let's just do the numerator and
the denominator, so it's a fraction and it looks kind of slope-esque. We've got negative
3 times 2 squared times negative 1 minus 10 times 2 times negative 1, so the numerator
is 32, over our denominator, which is 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2 times 2
cubed plus 5 times 2 squared, which is 28. Both of those are divisible by 4, 32 divided
by 4 is 8 and 28 divided by 4 is 7, so 8 sevenths is equal to our slope at the point 2 comma
negative 1. So the equation of the tangent line, y equals m, my slope 8 sevenths times
x minus x1, which is 2, plus the y1, which is negative 1, the equation of our tangent
line, of this ugly function is 8 sevenths x minus 2 minus 1. Let's do one more example,
it's got a trig function in it. Number 2, cosine of x, y, x, y, x, y, x, y, x, y, x, y, x, y, x,
y equals y. And we're going to find the equation of the tangent line at pi over 3 comma 1.
We'll do this implicitly because it's almost impossible to solve for y, at least it would
be quite tedious. So the derivative of cosine is negative sine of x, y. Using the chain
rule, we multiply by the derivative of what's inside. We want to make sure we multiply by
the entire derivative, and because we have to use the product rule, there's going to
be a plus, so I'm going to put this in parentheses to remind me to distribute the negative sine
through the parentheses. The derivative of x is just 1 times the y, which is y, plus
the derivative of y is our dy dx times the x, and that's equal to the derivative of y,
which we know is dy dx. We want to solve for the dy dx, we first have to get it out of
the parentheses, so we're going to distribute that negative sine x, y through. That gives
us negative y sine of x, y minus x sine of x, y times dy dx equals dy dx. We want to get
the dy dx's all on the same side, so we'll add that x sine x y to both sides, giving
us negative y sine of x, y equals dy dx, y minus x sine of x, y minus x sine of x, y
plus x sine of x, y, dy dx. Once they're all on one side, we can factor out dy dx, leaving
behind a 1, don't forget the 1, it doesn't just disappear, plus x sine of x, y plus
y, still equal to negative y sine of x, y. Finally, to get the dy dx alone, we divide
both sides by what it's multiplied to get our final derivative, negative y sine of x,
y, divided by 1 plus x sine of x, y equals dy dx. We're going to divide both sides by
dy dx. We want the slope though, or we want the equation, at pi over 3 comma 1. Let's
plug that into our function. We got negative y, which is negative 1, times the sine of
x times y, 1 times pi over 3 is just pi over 3, all over 1 plus x, which is pi over 3,
times the sine of x, y, which is pi over 3. If we remember our unit circle, pi over
3, the y coordinate there is the square root of 3 over 2, so we have negative root 3 over
2, over 1 plus pi over 3 times, again the sine of pi over 3 is root 3 over 2. I don't
like having those fractions and fractions, so let's clear out those fractions and fractions.
We've got a common denominator of 6. I'm going to multiply by 6 and distribute that 6 through.
6 over 2 will reduce to 3, so we have negative 3 root 3 over 6 plus 3 times 2 is 6, which
will reduce to the 6, so that's pi root 3. It looks weird and ugly, but sure enough
it is our derivative. We have y equals our slope, which is negative 3 root 3, and we
have negative 3 root 3 over 6 plus pi root 3 times x minus the x coordinate, which is
pi over 3, plus our y coordinate, which is 1, and this is the equation of the line that
is tangent to cosine xy equals y. So that's implicit differentiation. The idea behind
implicit differentiation is that we just take the derivative of both sides of the equation.
Using the chain rule, knowing that the derivative of y is dy dx, because y is a function of
x, it's not just a variable, it is a function of x, so we use our chain rule and multiply
by the derivative of y. Then we just have to solve the resulting equation for dy dx.
Looking forward to seeing you in class when we can work on this a little bit more. Give
yourself some time to practice before then, and we'll see you in class.
There is one more set of functions that we haven't taken a look at how to find the derivative
of. So we're going to attempt to answer that question today, is how do we find the derivative
of exponential and logarithmic functions?
And we'll break that up into two halves once. We'll talk about the exponentials and then
we'll come back and talk about the logarithmic functions. So first, exponential functions.
Some important formulas that will help us take derivative. The nicest derivative formula
I have all, and it's also the most interesting, is that the derivative of e to the x, the slope
of the tangent line to e to the x at e to the x, is actually exactly e to the x. Which
is kind of weird when you think about it. But if our base is not e to the x, it turns
out the derivative of any base to the x is that base to the x times the natural log of
the base. Which just so happens that the natural log of e is just one, so we end up with two
formulas that could be condensed into one. But since we use e to the x so often, we'll
give it its own little formula. These two formulas are going to be what guide us here
as we go into the first part of this video. So let's take a look at some examples of taking
derivatives with exponentials. Let's say f of x equals e to the cosine of x squared.
What we really have here is just a really big chain rule problem. It's a three level
chain rule, but we can do that. F prime of x is equal to the derivative of the outside
and the derivative of e to the x is e to the stuff, e to the cosine of x squared times
the derivative of the inside stuff, and so the derivative of cosine is negative sign
of the stuff, times the derivative of the inside stuff. And the derivative of cosine
of x squared is just 2x. Cleaning this up a little bit, putting the negative and 2x
out front, we'll put the sine of x squared next, and then the e to the cosine of x squared
after that, just so that it looks a little nicer. But that way we found our derivative,
which contained in e to the x. We could even expand this into any of our rules or patterns
that we've seen thus far, so what if we did a quotient rule? f of x is equal to e to the
3x minus 7 all over x squared plus 5x. Well, we should be very comfortable with the quotient
rule by now, so we take the derivative of the top, which is e to the 3x minus 7, because
the derivative of e to something is e to that something. But we have to multiply by the
derivative of the inside, which is just 3, and then we have to multiply by the denominator
x squared plus 5x. Then we subtract the derivative of the denominator, which is 2x plus 5, times
the numerator, which is e to the 3x minus 7, and that's all over the denominator squared
x squared plus 5x squared. Not a lot to clean up in there, so after using our quotient rule
and the exponent rule, we'll call that our derivative. Let's do one more, one that doesn't
use a base of e to the x, but uses some different base. Let's try f of x equals 4 to the x
times 5 to the x minus x. We could distribute the 4 to the x through, and then we don't
have to use the product rule. Well, we still would, but let's just keep it the way it is.
f prime of x is equal to, and we'll use the product rule here. The derivative of the first
part, the derivative of 4 to the x is 4 to the x, but if the base is not e, we need to
multiply by the natural log of the base, then times the second part, 5 to the x minus 1,
plus the derivative of the second part, well the derivative of an exponential is the exponential
times the natural log of the base minus the derivative of x is 1, times the first part,
which is just 4 to the x, and there's not really much that cleans up in this example
either, and so we end up with our solution. Basically, all we're doing is we're expanding
our repertoire of derivatives to include these two exponential formulas. The derivative of
anything is, I'm sorry, the derivative of the exponential is the exponential times the
natural log of the base. If it's e to the x, it's really nice because the derivative of
e to the x is just e to the x. We can use the fact that the exponential derivative is
so simple to derive and create the derivative of the logarithmic, if I can spell it right.
Logarithmic functions, and the way we get the derivative of the logarithmic functions is
we use implicit differentiation, because we know that if y equals the natural log of x,
we can rewrite this as e to the y equals x, because the base is e, the exponent is y,
and then if we take the derivative of both sides of this guy using implicit differentiation,
the derivative of e to the y is e to the y dy dx equals, the derivative of x is 1, dividing
both sides by e to the y, we get the derivative dy dx is equal to 1 over e to the y. But the
good news is, is that we know what y equals. y is equal to the natural log of x. So we
have 1 over e to the natural log of x, but e and the natural log with the same base is
our inverses, so that leaves us with just the x, and so we find out that dy dx is equal
to 1 over x. Kinda need how the formula comes out, so we've got our formulas for the logarithms.
The derivative of the natural log of x, we just found out is simply 1 over x. If the
base isn't a base either, we can do the derivative of any log base b of x, doing just a simple
change of base formula, we end up with 1 over x natural log of b, and these two formulas
allow us to take the derivatives with logarithms. Two more formulas to add to our derivative
repertoire. And so we should be able to solve a whole bunch of examples using all the other
derivative rules we've seen, but now throwing in some logarithms. If f of x equals the natural
log of the tangent of x squared minus 5x, what we really have is derivatives inside of
derivatives, so that f prime of x equals, using the chain rule, natural log, the derivative
of that is 1 over the stuff, 1 over the tangent of x squared minus 5x, times the derivative
of the inside. Well, the derivative of tangent is secant squared of the stuff, x squared
minus 5x, times the derivative of the inside, which is the x squared minus 5x, the derivative
there is 2x minus 5, and all there is to do is clean that up nicely, all that stuff multiplied
ends up in the numerator, and so we get this nice derivative secant squared of x squared
minus 5x, times the 2x minus 5, all over the tangent of x squared minus 5x. Let's try
one with the log that's got a different base. Let's say f of x is equal to the log base
7 of 2x minus 5, times the cosine of 5x. Here we have the product rule again, so we'll
take the derivative of the first, the derivative of log base 7 is 1 over the stuff, the 2x
minus 5, and because it's not a base e, we have to multiply by the natural log of the
base or the natural log of 7, times the second part. Actually, before we get to the second
part, we still need to multiply by the derivative of the inside, which is just 2, times the
second part, which is cosine of 5x, plus the derivative of the second part, the derivative
of cosine is negative sine, so let's change that to negative sine of 5x, times the derivative
of the inside, which is 5, and we still have to, using the product rule, multiply by the
first part, which is log base 7 of 2x minus 5. I just want to clean it up a little bit,
not much to clean up, but we'll definitely make it easier on the eyes. We'll combine
the fraction together, so we have 2 cosine of 5x over 2x minus 5, natural log of 7, minus,
we'll put the 5 out front, sine of 5x, log base 7 of 2x minus 5, and we have our derivative.
One nice thing that comes out of working with logarithms and derivatives is that logs have
some nice properties that help us simplify out to something that is very simple to take
the derivative of. For example, if we were given f of x equals the natural log of x to
the fourth, cosine of x, divided by the square root of x plus 3, that looks very ugly to
take the derivative of. However, we can break this up into three separate logarithms, one
for each factor. The logarithm from the denominator is going to be negative, and then we can also
pull exponents out in front of logarithms. So what we really have here, rewriting the
function is the natural log of x to the fourth, but the four moves out front, plus the natural
log of the cosine of x minus the natural log of the x plus 3, and then the one half power
can move out front. Now we've got something that's much easier to work with, much easier
to take the derivative of. f prime of x is equal to, we've got a constant of 4 times
the derivative of the natural log of x, which is just 1 over x, plus the natural log means
the derivative is 1 over that, so 1 over cosine of x, times the derivative of the inside,
which is negative sine of x, we'll just stick that in the numerator, minus one half, that's
a constant, so that's going to be out front, and the derivative of the natural log is 1
over the stuff, x plus 3, times the derivative of the inside, which is just 1, and we can
clean this up a little bit even, so that it's equal to 4 over x, we'll just say minus instead
of plus or negative, and sine over cosine we should recognize, sine over cosine is the
tangent, minus 1 over, and we could distribute if we want, 2x plus 6, don't have to distribute,
but why not, and we get this nice derivative. So that's one nice thing that comes out of
derivatives with logarithms, is quite often logarithms help us break the problem down,
where it started complex, what we end up with is quite simple to take the logarithm of.
Another nice trick that comes out of this, is what we call logarithmic differentiation,
which we use when the variable, we'll say x, but the variable is in both the exponent
and base, and the most classic example of that is if y equals x to the x power. Here
we can't really take the derivative because we could use the exponent rule, but that doesn't
work because we don't know what x is, we don't know how to do the base, we're kind of stuck
until we get this nice trick called logarithmic differentiation, where we take the natural
log of both sides, and when we do we get the natural log of y equals the natural log of
x to the x power, which allows us to use the log property. The log property says the natural
log of x to the n is equal to n times the natural log of x, we can move that exponent
out front, so now we have the natural log of y equals x times the natural log of x. Now
we can take the derivative, but because this has the natural log of y on both sides we
have to do implicit differentiation. The derivative of the natural log of y is 1 over y dy dx.
The derivative of x natural log of x, that's a product rule, we'll always end up with a
product rule here, the derivative of x is 1 times the natural log of x, plus the derivative
of natural log of x is 1 over x times the first, which is just x, but x over x is just
equal to 1, which is really nice. Then what we need to do is solve for the dy dx, we know
implicit differentiation, and it always turns out to do that we multiply by y. With implicit
differentiation this step is always the same, because you'll always have 1 over y, I'm sorry
not with implicit differentiation, with logarithmic differentiation this step is always the same,
because you'll always have 1 over y on the right, so we'll multiply both sides by y,
giving us dy dx is equal to the natural log of x plus 1 times y. So all that's left to
do then is to substitute y from the original function, y is equal to x to the x, so dy
dx is equal to, and I'll just put the y in front, x to the x times the natural log of
x plus 1, and now we've got our derivative. We can use this process though to solve things
that are much more complex than x to the x, we'll use this process of taking the log of
both sides and then the derivative implicitly to solve things more complex that might look
something like this, y equals 3x squared minus 5x all to the sine of x power. We have x both
in the base and in the exponent, when it occurs in both places we take the natural log of
both sides, the natural log of 3x squared minus 5x to the sine of x, whoops lost my
end, not to the sixth to the sine of x, let's clean that up. Now we have our log property
that says that exponent can come out front, so we know the natural log of y is equal to
the sine of x times the natural log of 3x squared minus 5x, then we can take the derivative
implicitly. On the left the derivative of the natural log of y is 1 over y times our
dy dx is equal to, we have a product rule here, the derivative of sine is cosine x times
the natural log of 3x squared minus 5x plus the derivative of the second part, the derivative
of natural log is 1 over the stuff, 3x squared minus 5x times the derivative of the inside,
and I'll go in the numerator, 6x minus 5 times the first part, the sine of x. Now we can
solve for the dy dx by multiplying both sides by y, and that tells us that dy dx is equal
to the cosine x natural log of 3x squared minus 5x plus 6x minus 5 times the sine of
x all over 3x squared minus 5x times y, but we know what y equals, y is equal to the original
problem. So dy dx is equal to the cosine of x times the natural log of 3x squared minus
5x plus 6x minus 5 sine of x divided by 3x squared minus 5x times our original problem
which was 3x squared minus 5x all to the sine of x power. And logarithms take that which
once was impossible, now very possible and straight forward. So we've kind of done three
things today, we talked about the derivatives of the exponentials, specifically e to the
x is e to the x, we talked about the derivatives of the logarithms, the derivative of the natural
log is 1 over x or 1 over the stuff, and then we talked about doing logarithmic differentiation
to take problems that would otherwise be impossible to take derivatives of, change their form
so that we can use logarithmic differentiation to find our derivative. Couple things to practice
with, take a look at those and we will see you in class to work on them further.
This video is going to take a look at a preview of working in two dimensions and three dimensions
and taking derivatives. Thus far we've only taken derivatives in the x direction where
we've got a coordinate plane in two dimensions, but we can extend that to a three dimensional
coordinate plane and still work with derivatives. The trick is we have to decide what direction
we're going in. So the question is going to be how do we calculate derivatives in 3D?
Now a 3D function, generally a 2D function is f of x, we've done a lot of work with that
because we just take the derivative with response to f of x with respect to x, but a three dimensional
function will have variables x and y in them to result in a z variable that's a solution.
So these are still a function, we've just got multiple variables inside the function,
and the way we take those derivatives is we take what is called a partial derivative,
or a derivative or rate of change in a specific direction. In other words, are we going left
and right? Are we going forwards and backwards? How far are we changing in each of these two
directions? And so to specify that we're just taking a derivative partially in one direction,
we've got a special notation to indicate this. You will see what we call the partial derivative
of f with respect to x. I'll even write that, that's the partial derivative in the x direction,
and you might think about that as the left right direction loosely. And it's kind of
this funky df dx that we saw before, but now because it's got this curved looking d, that
notation should tell us we're talking about a partial derivative in the x direction. And
similarly, you'll see a partial derivative with respect to y, that's the partial derivative
in the y direction, or how fast we're changing in the y direction, which you might think
of loosely as the up-down direction. And by up-down, I mean if I'm looking down at a
piece of paper, away from me and towards me, up-down, or left-right would be the other
two directions. So how are we changing left and right? How are we changing horizontally?
As we've got a partial change of the function. And the way we actually calculate a partial
derivative is we treat all other variables as constants.
So for example, let's say we've got f of x, y is equal to 3x squared y to the fourth.
And if I wanted to calculate the partial of f with respect to x in the x direction, we're
going to take the derivative with respect to x, and we're going to pretend the y is
a constant. So the derivative of 3x squared is 6x, and the y to the fourth is a constant.
So it's going to kind of hang out like constants do when they're multiplied by our x. I could
also take the derivative of this same function with respect to the y. In that case, we take
the derivative of the y, which is y cubed, and then we bring the 4 out front, 4 times
3 is 12, and we keep the x squared as if it was a constant, as if it was part of the 3.
Really important here to note, though, that the notation and process is different than
implicit differentiation. Implicit differentiation used that whole dy dx. With dy dx, y was
a function of x in two dimensions. y was f of x. Now we've got a three-dimensional function
that has x's and y's in the function, but these are functions. These pass the vertical
line test, or in three dimensions, the vertical plane test. With implicit differentiation,
we took the derivative of y as if it was a function of x, and then multiplied by its
derivative dy dx. That is different than partial derivatives, where we're just going
in the x direction in three dimensions, and the y is treated like a constant. Or we're
going in the y direction, and the x is treated as a constant. Be careful not to mix these
two processes, because they are very different. Let's try a few examples, though, where we
have to take a bunch of partials. What's nice about these partial derivatives is it's a great
place for us to synthesize all the derivative rules that we have seen up to this point and
see how we do. Let's first take a function in x and y. Let's call it 5x squared minus
7xy minus 9y to the fifth plus 2x minus 7y plus 3. First, we'll find the partial of f
with respect to x. We're going to pretend like all the y's are constants as we take
the derivative with respect to x. Our first term, we know that's 10x, minus the derivative
of x is 1, so we're just left with the constants 7 and y. The 9y to the fifth, those are all
constants, and the derivative of just a constant is 0, so that term's gone. 2x, the derivative
of that, is just 2. Again, the 7y, all constant, the 3, constant. Therefore, those derivatives
are also 0. Our partial derivative of f with respect to x is 10x minus 7y plus 2. We can
also take the partial derivative of f with respect to the y. With respect to the y, the
5x squared is now a constant, so that's 0. Negative 7xy, the derivative of the y is
1, so we're just left with the constant 7x. The derivative of negative 9y to the fifth
is negative 45y to the fourth, bringing that 5 out front and dropping the exponent by 1.
2x, it's all constant. The derivative of negative 7y is negative 7, and 3 is also a constant,
so that derivative is 0. Now we've got our partial derivatives with respect to x and
the partial derivative with respect to y. Let's try another one. We'll increase in complexity
here, making these more interesting. Function of f with respect to x and y, the function
of f with x and y as variables is the secant of x to the fourth y plus 7x minus 4y, and
now the partial of f with respect to x. Here we've got a chain rule set up. We've got a
secant of stuff. The derivative of secant is secant tangent of the stuff, so the secant
of x to the fourth y plus 7x minus 4y tangent of the stuff, which is x to the fourth y plus
7x minus 4y times the derivative of the stuff inside it with respect to x. The x to the
fourth becomes 4x cubed with the constant of y still there, plus the derivative of 7x
is just 7. Negative 4y, those are all constants because we treat the y as a constant, so it's
zero, and now we've got our partial derivative of f with respect to x. Let's try the partial
derivative of f with respect to y. Very similar chain rule again. The derivative of secant
is still the secant tangent of the stuff, so we have the secant of x to the fourth y
plus 7x minus 4y tangent of x to the fourth y plus 7x minus 4y times the derivative of
the inside stuff with respect to y. So now with the x to the fourth y, the derivative
of y is just 1, so we're left with the constant x to the fourth. 7x doesn't have any y's
on it, so that goes to zero, and the derivative of negative 4y is negative 4. Now we've got
the derivative, the partial derivative with respect to y. Let's make this a little more
interesting. Let's say f is a function of x and y, which is equal to e to the x, y cosine
of 2x, sine of 3y, and if we want the partial of f with respect to x. Here we've got a
product with respect to x. The sine of 3y is a constant, so really the only product
is e to the x, y times the cosine of 2x, and then we will have that constant out in front.
So I'm just going to go ahead and write that constant in front. The sine of 3y times the
derivative of e to the x, y is e to the x, y times the derivative of the inside with
respect to x is just y times the second part, which is the cosine of 2x, plus the derivative
of the second part. The derivative of cosine is negative sine. Let's make that negative
sine of 2x times the derivative of the inside, which is 2, and let's go ahead and put that
2 in front of the sine just to keep it clean. Times the other part, e to the x, y, and we've
got our partial derivative with respect to x. Let's also do the partial derivative of
f with respect to y. Very similarly, but this time, notice the factor of cosine of 2x does
not have any y's on it. That is a constant that's being multiplied by stuff with y's.
So that constant we'll put out front, cosine of 2x, times the derivative of the product.
Our product is multiplying e to the x, y times the sine of 3y. We'll take the derivative
of the first times the second plus the derivative of the second times the first, all the partial
with respect to y. The derivative of e to the x, y is e to the x, y times the derivative
of the inside, the derivative of x, y with respect to y is just x, times the second part,
which is the sine of 3y, plus the derivative of the second part, the derivative of sine
is the cosine of 3y, times the derivative of the inside, which is a 3, times the first
part, e to the x, y. And we have our derivative. Let's try one last example.
F is a function of x and y. It's equal to the tangent of x to the fourth, y to the third,
times the natural log of 5 over x, y. Now something to make life easier, you should
be very good at picking up now. When we see a fraction like 5 over x, y, we can think
about that as 5x to the negative 1, y to the negative 1, because that's going to be easier
to take the derivative of. So as we take the derivative, that's the natural log of 5x to
the negative 1, y to the negative 1. And first we're going to do the partial derivative of
f with respect to x. And again, we have a product rule. And each product part is going
to be a chain rule, so there's going to be a couple pieces to this one. First, the derivative
of the first times the second. The derivative of tangent is secant squared of the stuff.
And then we multiply by the derivative of the inside with respect to x. So the derivative
of x to the fourth is 4x cubed. And the y cubed is a constant. Times the natural log
of 5x to the negative 1, y to the negative 1. Plus, the derivative of the second. The
derivative of natural log is 1 over the stuff, 5x to the negative 1, y to the negative 1.
Times the derivative of the inside with respect to x, which is going to be negative 5x to
the negative 2, bringing the negative 1 out front, subtracting 1. And the y to the negative
1 is a constant. Times the tangent of x to the fourth, y cubed. Times the first part.
Little bit to clean up, let's move the 4x cubed, y cubed to the front. Also the 5 over
5 reduces out. The y to the negative 1s reduce out, which is really nice. And so we're just
left with an x to the, when I move the negative 2 down, it's going to be just a positive 1
left over. So cleaning that up, we get 4x cubed, y cubed secant squared of x to the
fourth, y cubed natural log of, let's go ahead and make this a fraction, 5 over x, y. Plus,
we've got the tangent of x cubed, or I'm sorry, x to the fourth, y cubed. And all that's
left from that ugly fraction we crossed everything out is just an x in the denominator. And now
we've got our partial derivative with respect to x. Let's do the partial derivative with
respect to y. It's going to be very similar because x and y appear in very similar locations.
But just to walk through it together, product rule again. So first, the derivative of tangent
is secant squared of the stuff, x to the fourth, y cubed times the derivative of the inside,
this time with respect to y. In the y direction is 3y squared. And the x to the fourth is a constant
times the second part, which is the natural log of, I'll just leave it as 5 over x, y.
Plus, the derivative of the second part, which is natural log is 1 over the stuff,
1 over 5x to the negative 1, y to the negative 1 times the derivative of the inside, which is
going to be y to the negative 2 with a negative 5 and an x to the negative 1 because an x is a constant.
Times the first part, which is tangent of x to the fourth, y cubed.
The cleanup is very similar. We'll move the 3x to the fourth y squared to the front.
The fives are going to divide out, which is nice. Oops, I just saw an error that I missed earlier.
We had a minus and my minus disappeared. That should have been a minus on number four.
I apologize for that. Don't lose your signs.
But the x to the negative ones do divide out. And when we bring the y down, we'll just be left
with a single y in the denominator. So for our cleaned up version, we have 3x to the fourth y
squared secant squared of x to the fourth y cubed natural log of 5 over xy minus because of the
minus sign. Not forgetting it this time. We'll put the tangent of x cubed x to the fourth y cubed
in the numerator. And in the denominator, all that's left is a single y. And we have our partial
derivative with respect to y. The homework assignment with partial derivatives is really short,
but they are going to force you to review all of these derivatives properties we've worked with
here in chapter three, which is what makes it such a great assignment. So take a look at it,
give it a good practice, and then we will see you in class to discuss these partial derivatives
in a little more detail. Chapter four is going to take a look at how we can use the derivative
in various contexts and applications. The first one is what are called related rates. And so our
question we're going to answer is how are rates of change?
That's a derivative, a rate of change. How are they related to each other?
And this is what brings up this idea of related rates. And basically a related rate means two
things are changing, but they're changing in relationship to one another. One increases at
a certain rate and it makes the other one increase or decrease at a certain rate. The best example
of this is if you think about filling up a balloon. Let's say if we have a spherical balloon
that is filled
with air at a rate of three cubic inches per second.
We want to know how fast
is the radius changing
when the radius
is four inches?
As we solve these related rate problems, the radius of the balloon is related to the amount
of air in it. As we solve these problems, we're going to go through kind of a four-step process.
The first step is going to be to draw a picture
with the related formulas.
So we're talking here about a sphere. So we'll draw our little spherical balloon here
and the radius of r. And we're talking specifically about the volume or how much
stuff is in this circle. And we can look up or we might know the formula for the volume of a sphere
is four-thirds pi times the radius cubed.
Once we know that relationship, we're ready for the second step which is to take the derivative
with respect
to time.
So if I were to take the derivative of this guy, we're going to have to use implicit
differentiation because time t is not a variable here. So v, the derivative of v is just one dv dt
is equal to when we four-thirds and pi are constants.
And we know we can use our exponent rule on the three, bringing the three out front and reducing
it by one, so r squared, and then times the derivative of r which is dr dt. This one's kind
of nice because the threes are going to divide out. So we really say dv dt is equal to four pi r
squared dr dt. And now that we have our derivative with respect to time, let's plug in what we know
and I can't quite fit it all on the screen, so hopefully you have it on your notes. We're going
to plug in what we know. And what we know is that the volume is increasing at a rate of three cubic
inches per second. That is the change in volume with respect to time. We also know that the radius
is currently four inches. It's not changing with respect to time, it's at this moment exactly
four inches. So when we come down to plug in dv dt, the volume is changing at a rate of three
cubic inches equals four pi r, the radius we said was four inches squared dr dt. And then all we
have to do is solve for the remaining rate or dr dt, the change in the rate with respect to time.
So simplifying, four squared is 16 times four is 64 pi dr dt. And then we can get the dr dt
or the change in the radius with respect to time. How fast is that radius changing by dividing three
by the 64 pi? And then we have three over 64 pi inches per second is the rate that radius is
changing when it's exactly four inches long and the volume is increasing at three cubic inches per
second. Let's try another related rate problem. Let's say we have a seven foot ladder
that is sliding down the wall.
And we know that the top
is sliding down
at a rate of 1.5 feet per second. We want to know how fast
is the bottom moving
along the ground.
When the bottom
is six feet from the wall.
Let's draw a picture to get a better idea of this. We've got a building,
the ground, and there is this ladder that's leaning against them. The problem is that ladder is
sliding down the wall at a rate of 1.5 feet per second.
We know the ladder itself is seven feet long.
And the moment we're interested in is the fact that we are six feet from the wall.
And if we call this other side A, we don't know what A is, but we're going to be able to find
that pretty quick. The big thing though that we know, we know that the formula for any right
triangle is that A squared plus B squared equals C squared.
And we can take the derivative of this with respect to time. We have 2A times the change in A with
or DADT plus 2B dB dt equals 2C dC dt.
Then let's go ahead and plug in what we know and see what we come up with.
We can actually figure out how long A is using the same Pythagorean theorem.
Seven squared is equal to six squared plus A squared, or A squared plus six squared equals seven
squared. A squared is 36. A squared plus 36 equals 49. So A squared is equal to 13. A is the square
root of 13. So at this moment up the wall, we're the square root of 13 high. So plugging that into
the formula, we have 2 times A, which is the square root of 13, times the change in A with respect
to time. We know that A is going down, so we're going to say it's negative to represent the downward
motion, and it's moving down at a rate the change with respect to time is negative 1.5.
Plus 2B, B is the bottom of six times the change in B with respect to time, and we don't know how
fast this ladder is moving out. That's what we're looking for, the dB dt.
Equals 2C. C is seven feet, but how fast is C the ladder's length changing?
Well, if we think about a ladder sliding down a wall, that ladder's not changing length at all. It's
always going to be seven feet long, whether it's completely against the wall, completely against
the ground, or anywhere in between. There's no change in the ladder's length, so we'll use zero
for that length. When we clean this up, then, we end up with negative 3 square root of 13,
plus 12 dB dt equals zero. And this is going to solve quite nicely for us. Add the 3 root
13 to both sides. We get 12 dB dt equals 3 square roots of 13. Divide both sides by 12,
and the change in B of the base with respect to time is equal to 3 root 13 over 12,
and what's nice is the 3 over 12 reduce. So for our final rate, this ladder is moving square root
of 13 over 4 feet per second, when the ladder is six feet from the wall.
Let's try another example.
Let's say a camera
is 2,000 feet
from a rocket
that fires vertically.
And when this rocket
is 500 feet in the air,
its velocity,
I mean speed, but with direction, is 400 feet per second.
The cameraman needs to know what is the needed rate of change
of the angle of the camera.
Let's draw a picture to kind of get an idea of what's going on. We've got a little camera here,
that's my camera, which is 2,000 feet away
from the launch point for a rocket. That's my little rocket. It's going to go up in the air,
and the camera is going to change angle so that it can watch that
rocket no matter how high it gets.
We need to come up with an equation that relates these variables. Well, since we're
dealing with an angle and the side's opposite and adjacent, we should know that the tangent
of that angle is equal to the height over the 2,000 feet, the opposite over the adjacent.
Then we can take the derivative of that.
Actually, let's save ourselves a little bit of work. Before we take the derivative,
let's multiply both sides by 2,000 so we don't have to
worry about the fraction. It's just a constant, so it's not going to make much difference.
Now let's take the derivative of that. The derivative is going to be 2,000 secant squared of theta
with respect to time, so we have to say dt d theta using that implicit differentiation,
equals the derivative of the height is dH dt.
So now we can plug in what we know.
First, we need to figure out what secant squared of theta is.
Secant of theta, you remember, is 1 over the cosine of theta, or the reciprocal of cosine.
If cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse, the secant is the hypotenuse over the adjacent, the reciprocal.
We already know the adjacent side is 2,000. We just need to find the hypotenuse side.
We're interested in the moment where the height is 500 feet.
Fortunately, the quadratic formula can tell us that 2,000 squared plus 500 squared is going to be equal to c squared.
If I were to do that on my calculator, we would get 425 with 4 zeros after it equals c squared,
and so if I take the square root, c is approximately equal to 2061.55.
So 2061.55.
So plugging in what we have, we've got 2,000 times the secant, which is the hypotenuse, 2061.55,
over the adjacent, which is 2,000 squared.
Oops, I just realized I got a small error up here. It should be d theta dt. We're taking the respect to time.
The change in the angle with respect to time is what we're solving for.
The change in the height, we know the height is increasing at 400 feet per second.
The change in the height is 400 feet per second.
Then we start multiplying this out.
We will do the 2,000 times 2061.55 over 2,000 squared.
When I do all of that, I get 2125 approximately d theta dt
equals the 400, so the change in the angle with respect to time after I divide is 400 over 2125,
which if I divide that, I get 0.1882 radians per second.
So when this rocket is 500 feet in the air, the camera needs to be changing its angle at 0.1882 radians per second.
Let's do one last example of these related rates.
Finding an equation that relates the rates, taking a derivative with respect to time,
plugging in what we know, and solving.
Let's say I have a funnel and water is draining from it.
Water is draining
from a cone-shaped funnel.
At a rate of 0.25 cubic feet per second.
The height of the funnel
is 3 feet.
And the radius at the top
is 2 feet.
But we're not interested in the funnel, we want to know about the water.
At what rate
is the height
of the water
changing
when the height
is 1 foot?
Well, let's draw a picture of our funnel.
Here's our funnel.
Water is leaking out.
It's not full though, so here's the water level.
The funnel itself we know is 3 feet high.
The radius on the funnel is 2 feet.
That's a constant, so we'll label those constants.
We know water is coming out at 0.025 feet per second.
So we'll call that negative 0.25 feet per second.
Cubic feet per second.
It's a volume.
We're interested specifically in the water.
We don't really know the radius and the height because that's going to change.
Those aren't constant.
But what we do know is an equation about the volume of that water.
You might have to look it up or we might know that the volume of a cone
is 1 third pi r squared times the height.
The problem we have is we end up with three variables.
And so if we were to take the derivative, we'd have three rates of change.
The change in the height, the change in the radius,
and the change in the volume.
We want to reduce that down to 2, so it's a little more manageable.
Fortunately, if we were to draw a line down the middle,
you see we end up with triangles that make up kind of the right side,
a big triangle with a height of 3 and a length of 2,
and a small triangle with a height of h and a radius of r.
Those triangles, because they both have a right angle and sharing angle,
are similar triangles, so their sides must be proportional.
In other words, if we set up the radius divided by the height on the little triangle,
it would be the same on the big triangle, a radius of 2 divided by the height of 3.
And we can solve this for r really quickly by multiplying by h.
r is equal to 2h over 3.
And so let's plug that in to our radius.
That's going to reduce out the radius variable,
because we really don't care about the radius.
We care about the height, and we care about the volume of the water decreasing.
We've got height and we've got volume.
We do not have anything about the radius, so let's stick with that pattern.
So our volume is 1 third pi times the radius, which is 2h over 3 squared times h.
And actually, let's go ahead and simplify that.
We've got 1 third pi times 2 squared is 4,
h squared over 3 squared is 9 times the height.
And so our final formula that connects the variables of the height and the volume.
Oops, not 1 third.
Let's multiply.
1 times 4 is 4, 3 times 9 is 27.
So we've got 4 pi over 27 times the height cubed.
Now that we have our formula connecting our variables, we'll take the derivative.
The derivative of v is 1 dv dt, the change in the volume with respect to time.
4 pi over 27 is a constant, but the derivative of h cubed is h squared with the 3 out front
times dh dt.
Let's go ahead and simplify.
3 over 27 is 9, so dv dt is equal to 4 pi over 9 h squared dh dt.
Let's come over here to the side and plug in what we know.
dv dt, that's the change in the volume with respect to time.
We said the volume was decreasing at 0.25 cubic feet per second.
Decreasing, so it's negative, 0.25 is equal to 4 pi over 9.
The height that the moment we care about, the moment we care about
is 1 feet, so we're going to put 1 in for our height at the moment we care about,
squared, dh dt, that's what we're looking for, the change in the height with respect to time.
So we have negative 0.25 is equal to 1 squared is 1 times 4 is 4 pi over 9 dh dt.
And so to get dh dt alone, we multiply by 9 over 4 pi times the negative 0.25
and the change in height with respect to time
is equal to approximately, putting that in the calculator, negative 0.17914 feet per second.
In other words, at that moment the height is decreasing by almost 0.18 feet per second.
And that's how we're going to handle these related rates. We're going to take a look at drawing a
picture, finding a formula that relates the variables of interest, the variables that are
changing specifically, then we'll take the derivative with respect to time implicitly
and then we'll plug in what we know and solve for what we don't know. Give a couple of those
some practice on the assignment and we will see you in class to discuss this further.
Sometimes it is easier to use a derivative to approximate the value of a equation or a function
than it is to actually calculate the exact value and that's what we're going to take a look at
today. The question is going to be how do we approximate a function at a point?
And to set this up we're going to start by asking the why it works or what's going on in the background,
the why, behind what we call linear approximation.
To set this up we're going to recall the equation of a tangent line.
To the function f of x at the point a
is
y equals the y-coordinate which is just f of a
plus the slope of the tangent line at a which is f prime of a
times x minus the point which is a.
And what we also know is that close to the point, close to a,
it is close
to f of a. In other words, here's what I mean. Let's say I've got this curve here
and there's this point on the curve that we're going to call a
and we calculate this tangent line at a
and if I look at a value that is close to a
it's also going to be close to the point of the line. It's also going to be a very similar height.
It's going to be close to f of a. It's off by a little bit but that line can give us a really good
estimation of what's happening close to the point a as it curves away from a.
And the fact of the matter is lines
are easier
than curves
to calculate points.
And so we're going to prefer to use that blue line that gets us close to a
to calculate what's actually happening close to a.
Maybe this will look better with a more concrete example.
Let's take a look at
example.
Let's say we were trying to calculate the square root of 25.1 by hand.
That would be very very difficult because it doesn't have a perfect square root. We know it's
close to five because the square root of 25 is five and that's the fact that we're going to use
in order to estimate it. We know that the square root of 25.1 is close to the square root of 25.
So we can consider.
Let's say the function f of x is equal to the square root of x or as we like to have it in
calculus x to the one half.
Then f prime of x the derivative is one half times x to the negative one half
or one over two square root of x.
We need to know what f of 25 the easy point and f prime of 25 is
in order to estimate the not so easy point of the square root of 25.1.
Well f of 25 is the square root of 25 which we know is five
and f prime of 25 is one over two times the square root of 25 or one over two times five
one tenth.
So if we want the linear approximation
of the square root of x at 25
that's just the equation of our tangent line.
The y coordinate of five
plus the slope which is the derivative one tenth
times x minus the x coordinate which is 25.
We can use this linear equation to estimate the square root of numbers very close to 25.
So we can estimate
the square root of 25.1 by using x is equal to 25.1 in this equation.
So the linearization at 25.1 is equal to five plus one tenth times 25.1 minus 25
and if we plug that into our calculator we will get that the answer is approximately
5.01 and so we're estimating that the square root of 25.1 is about 5.01.
So I know what you're thinking how good is that estimate? Well let's actually find it on the
calculator we did it by hand we're going to compare with the square root of 25.1 on our calculator.
So on my calculator I will do the square root of 25.1 and we get 5.00999 that's pretty darn
close 5.00999 it is quite close to our estimated value that we found by hand
and doing it by hand with the square root would have been a real big pain because curves are
difficult to calculate but lines are much easier to work with and so that's this idea of linear
approximation is we're going to estimate by finding the equation of the tangent line
to see what's happening really close. So let's try some examples see if we can get good at this
first example we're going to estimate
1 over 3.1 squared
well the function that we seem to be working with is we're doing 1 over x squared or x to the negative
2 and then we can make the x equal to 3 so f prime the derivative of that is negative 2
x to the negative 3 or negative 2 over x cubed 3.1 is close to 3
so we're going to find f of 3 and f prime of 3 and then we'll see what's happening
close to that so f of 3 is equal to 1 over 3 squared which we know is 1 ninth
f prime of 3 is negative 2 over 3 cubed which is negative 2 over 27
so let's set up our linear approximation is equal to the y-coordinate of 1 ninth
plus the slope which is negative 2 over 27 times x minus the x-coordinate the x-coordinate is 3
we can use this to estimate 1 over x squared near the point 3 we're particularly interested
in 3.1 so 1 ninth minus 2 over 27 times 3.1 minus 3
and if I plug 3.1 into that into my calculator we get 0.1037
so let's check it on the calculator what is 1 over 3.1 squared
1 divided by 3.1 squared let's see how close we got it's 0.1041
and as you can see that is quite close we're only off by about 0.0004
not too bad of an estimate doing it by hand was much nicer than doing 3.1 squared getting
in something with two decimal points and then doing that long division much nicer
this even works with trigonometry let's do a trig example
let's estimate
the tangent of 44 degrees
well let's change that to radians first we see that's close to 45
so we're really working with the tangent of 45 degrees and if you remember your unit circle
45 degrees is pi over 4
so we're looking at the tangent of pi over 4 to estimate our point
so f of x is the tangent of a value tangent of any point we're going to find that point
f prime we know is the secant squared of x
we're specifically interested in pi over 2 so f of pi over 2 is equal to the tangent
i'm sorry not pi over 2 pi over 4 the tangent of pi over 4 we should remember is equal to 1
and f prime of pi over 4 is the secant squared of pi over 4
if it helps to remember secant is 1 over cosine cosine is the x-coordinate 2 root 2 over 2
the reciprocal of that is going to be actually i'll write down what i'm talking about here at the top
so it's 1 over the cosine of pi over 4 which is 1 over root 2 over 2
which is the reciprocal of that 2 over the square root of 2
and if i rationalize we get 2 root 2 over 2 which is equal to just the square root of 2
so square root of 2 is the secant but that's squared so it's actually equal
square root of 2 squared is just 2 remembering your trig from secant how does that work
secant of pi over 4 is equal to 2
all right let's make our linearization equation then l of x is equal to the y-coordinate of 1
plus the slope of 2
times x minus the x-coordinate which is pi over 4
but we want the linearization of 44 degrees which we have to change that 44 degrees into radians 44 degrees
remember we multiply that by pi over 180 so we have 44 pi over 180
radians there's no reason to reduce because we're going to use our calculator
so we're doing the linearization of 44 pi over 180
is equal to 1 plus 2 times 44 pi over 180 minus pi over 4
plugging that mess into our calculator we get 0.9651
so that's our estimate let's check it with the actual value of the tangent of 44 degrees
and since our calculator is probably in radian mode let's do the 44 pi over 180
verify that my mode is in radians yes so we've got the tangent of 44 pi divided by 180
and it equals 0.9657
0.9657 and look how close the actual value was it was only off by 0.0006
only a 20th of a percent
so we have this idea that we can get close to any curve using a tangent line and so if I move a
little bit to the right or if I move a little bit to the left I can see what's happening
kind of near that point but it kind of begs this question how much are we off by how much are we
changing by this kind of leads into this concept of what we call differentials
how much are we off by as x changes how much does y change in relationship to x is there
a relationship there a differential is really just the amount a function changes
as a result
of a small change I'm going to move this up
as a result of a small change in x
not the amount the amount the amount of function changes as a result of a small change in x
so we know that dy dx is equal to the derivative of the function
dy though is representing a change in y a small change in y and dx is representing a small
change in x it's the change in y with respect x what's happening how are things changing
really close to that point so if we want to know how much the y's are changing if we multiply both
sides by dx then we get that dy is equal to f prime of x dx and this formula
is the formula for a differential it tells us for every small change in y it's equal to the
derivative of the function times the small change in x so if I was asked to find the differential
equation of y equals four x squared minus secant x first we can take the derivative
which is dy dx equals 8x minus secant x tangent x
and then multiply both sides by the dx so that we can see what a small change in y does
it's equal to whatever 8x minus secant x tangent x dx equals
so now if I know the amount of that small change in x I could plug that into this equation
and estimate how y is changing for a given small change in x in fact let's do an example equation
where we do just that let's find the differential
and evaluate
when x is equal to zero and the small change in x dx is equal to point two
and let's do the function y equals 5x minus three over 2x plus one
what we're asking for is at the point zero on this function if the x changes a little bit if the x
changes by point two how much would we expect the y to change by what's the little bit y changes by
well for this one it's going to be quite a dramatic change because of its structure
first we have to find the derivative dy dx and we know the derivative of a fraction is the
derivative of the top times the bottom minus the derivative of the bottom times the top
and so that gives us five times 2x plus one minus two times 5x minus three all over the
bottom squared the 2x plus one squared let's clean that up a little bit five times two let's
distribute is 10x plus five minus distributing the negative two through 10x plus six over 2x plus
one squared and that's nice because the 10x is subtract out to zero so we're left with
11 over 2x plus one squared
to get the differential we just multiply both sides by the dx
and we find that the differential in y the change in y the difference in y is equal to 11
over 2x plus one squared dx
now we're asked to evaluate it evaluate what the change in y is when x is zero and the change in x
is point two well we'll estimate that as 11 over two times x which is zero plus one squared
times the differential times the point two which comes out to be 11 times point two
over one which is 2.2
so at the point zero when x changes point two we're going to expect the y to change by about
2.2 and that's how we can find that differential and see kind of that
estimated change at the point so the big thing for today though is linearization to
estimate a point and we also took a little bit of a look at differentials take a look at those
practice a few and we will see you in class one of the most important things the derivative
can tell us is where the minimum and maximum points are on a function so that's what the question
we're going to look at today is how do we identify the minimum or the maximum points of a function
and to set this up there's a little bit of vocabulary that we need to be familiar with
as we work with this concept and to help us kind of visualize the vocabulary I'm going to put a
function here let's say it's going to start at zero it's going to come down come up really high
go down really low come up a little bit and then go towards an asymptote at zero okay
okay the first vocabulary word we need to know is what is the absolute minimum
and quite simply the absolute minimum is the lowest point
so let's actually give this graph that we just made some coordinates here
let's call this we'll just make it one two up and one two down so you can see that the absolute
minimum the absolute lowest point is at x is at y equals negative two it's down low y equals negative
two the other word we need to know is as you might expect the absolute maximum
as you might expect is the highest point on the graph
and so the highest point on this graph is up at this top peak we're going to call that the
absolute maximum and you see that's at a height of two y equals two is the absolute maximum of this
graph we can kind of generalize this idea of absoluteness with what we call the absolute
extrema
and that is basically just talking about both the absolute
max and min together so when I say what are the absolute extrema I'm asking what's the absolute
maximum and what's the absolute minimum but we don't just have absolute maximums and minimums we
also have what we call local minimums which we'll say is the lowest point in the area
so there's nobody lower around here so we're going to call it the absolute
minimum and you'll see we've got a little dip off to the right we can call the
oops
we can call that the local minimum because it's kind of a valley it's not the lowest
valley but it is the lowest valley in the area so that's going to be at y equals negative one
and similarly we can have a local maximum
which as you would expect is the highest point in the area
and the local maximum you'll see off to the right with this little peak is the local max
it's the highest mountain in the area it's just not the highest mountain
overall and that one has a height of one so we would say that is y equals one
and similarly we can lump those together and call them the local extrema
which is all the local min maxes grouped together
what's interesting about all of these points though is if we notice the derivative or the
tangent line at each of these points is always going to be a flat line the derivative at each
of these points is equal to zero they have a slope of zero slope of zero slope of zero and
slope of zero anytime the slope is zero that's going to identify one of these local min or
local max and possibly an absolute min or max we have a special name for those points those are
called critical points critical points are a point where the derivative
is either zero or undefined
and what's really important there is it might be a local extremum
it's not guaranteed to be a local min or a local max or even an absolute min or an absolute max
but it certainly is a very good candidate for that to occur so using this idea
this leads into getting away from the vocabulary now this leads into what we call the extreme
value theorem
or affectionately called the evt extreme value theorem and basically the extreme value theorem
states that if a function f is continuous
on an interval between a and b
then there is
an absolute
maximum
on a b
and in absolute minimum
in other words if we take a closed interval somewhere on that interval is going to be a
maximum and somewhere on that interval is going to be a minimum and what's really important to
note is the min and max points are either
a the first point of the interval b the end of the interval
or what we're going to call c
they're either at a b or c where c
is when the derivative at that point equals zero or where c is a critical point
what this is really saying is find the critical points
and test these points
and the edges
and either the critical points or the edges are going to be your minimums and or your maximums
let's take a look at what we mean by that let's say that f of x is equal to two x cubed
minus three x squared minus 12x plus five and we're going to look on the interval from zero
to four to find the absolute minimum and the absolute maximum in that range
well first we have to find the critical points and that's when the derivative is equal to zero
because it might level off and come back down so where is that derivative equal to zero
well the derivative is 6x squared minus 6x minus 12 and we'll set that equal to zero
solving we factor out a six x squared minus x minus two continuing to factor we have x minus
two times x plus one and so we've got two potential critical points two and negative one
these are the critical points
that's where the derivative is zero that's where it levels off
however we need to be careful all we really care about is numbers between zero and four
so negative one doesn't really help us because it's outside of the range
so now we know our critical points we just have to test what is f
of the critical point what is f of the edge and f of the other edge
one of those is the minimum and one of those is the maximum and one we don't really care about
so let's get our calculator
let's get y equals clear out any function that might be in there and let's just type our function
in here 2x cubed
minus 3x squared minus 12x plus five
and we'll hit second table so that we can enter in our own values and let's delete out the values
we don't care about so we're interested in when x is two when x is zero and when x is four
and you see our y's are negative 15 five and 37
negative 15 five and 37
and we can see on there that negative 15 is the minimum number the 37 is the maximum number
we don't care about the zero but we have a maximum of 37 at x equals four
and we have a minimum of negative 15 at x equals two
we've identified our minimum and maximum using the extreme value theorem or EVT
for this function on this range
let's try one more that might be a little more open
let's see what happens when we say f of x
equals cosine squared of x and we're going to do it on negative infinity to infinity
it's not really a closed interval but the extreme value theorem should still apply here
we can't check the extremes of negative infinity and positive infinity
but we certainly can check the critical points to see if there's any minimums
or maximums so first f prime of x the derivative it's a chain rule so we have two times the cosine
of x times the derivative of cosine which is sine
and we want to know when that derivative is equal to zero
well it's already factored we just have the cosine of x equals zero
and the sine of x equals zero
first thinking about the cosine of x on our unit circle cosine of x is equal to zero
cosine is the x coordinate it's equal to zero at the top and at the bottom
which means x here is equal to pi over two and then we move a pi over to three pi over two
so it's pi over two plus
n pi's every pi around and n can be any num any element of the integers we'll say
n is some integer one two three four or it could be negative one negative two negative three negative four
for sine of x
sine of x is going to be the x coordinates i'm sorry the y coordinates and the y coordinates
are zero here at zero and pi so sine of x tells us that x is equal to pi plus n pi
well let's go to our calculator and see what we have for min's and max's hitting y equals clearing
out the old function we want to do parentheses the cosine of x and we want to square it
to lead out the old values for the table
and our first point is pi over two
we get zero add n pi so we've got pi over two plus one pi
we get zero again and pi over two plus two pi
we get zero again and again so what we see is each of these guys is going to give us zero for a height
let's try the other ones let's just try pi and plus n pi
from our second from the sine so just pi pi is equal to one
what if we do pi plus pi pi plus one pi also equal to one what about pi plus two pi
also equal to one what we see is each of these always equals two one
so we're going to have not an absolute max or an absolute min because it doesn't
peak out but we do get these relative maximums and relative minimums so we can say the relative
or not relative but local local minimum at x equals pi or let's say local minimum of
zero at x equals pi over two plus n pi
where n is an element of the integers and we have a local maximum
of one at x equals pi plus n pi
where n is an element of the integers again
just to kind of see what's happening here if I were to actually graph this let's adjust our window
window let's go from negative six pi
to pi
and I want to label every pi over two
min I'm going to do a minimum of negative two and a maximum of two
and when I graph it you see every pi over two there's either a local min or a local max
I didn't do the window I wanted but it gets the idea here as we get a local min or a local max
every pi over two based on what we just found and we know the heights one and the heights are zero
so that's the big idea for today is the extreme value theorem that if f is continuous all we
need to do is find the critical points and check the edges and one of those is going to be the local
min or the absolute min and one of those is going to be the absolute max take a look at it on the
homework today and we will see you in class to talk about the extreme value theorem a little bit more
today we're going to take a look at what's called the mean value theorem the mean value theorem
takes a look at answering the question when is the instantaneous
rate of change
or the rate of change at any specific moment equal to the average
so for example if you go on a hour long trip and you average 40 miles an hour on that trip
when were you actually driving 40 miles an hour sometimes you're driving faster sometimes you
are driving slower but when were you actually equal to the 40 miles an hour or your average
for the entire trip and this is what the mean value theorem finds for us
the mean value theorem
or sometimes called MVT
first before we can use the mean value theorem there are two requirements
that must be meant and if either of these are not true the mean value theorem does not apply
first the function must be continuous
on the range we're talking about from a to b
and second it must be differential
on that same range from a to b
if the function is continuous between two numbers and is differentiable on those two
numbers or between those two numbers then we can say that there exists
at least
one point c
that is between
a and b
such that
the derivative at that point is equal to the rate of change or the slope
the f of b minus f of a over b minus a
maybe to help us see this it might help to see it graphically what we're talking about
graphically what we're saying is
if I take a curve that goes from one point around up into another point
from a to b where we've got f of a
and f of b on the y-axis if I was to connect the point directly from a to b with a straight line
that slope is going to be my average rate of change between the two points
and what the mean value theorem states is that there is at least one point then in between them
called c where this tangent line is parallel in other words the instantaneous rate of change
at that point is the same as the average between a and b in fact you might notice that there's
two points on this graph that give us a parallel slope so maybe we could call them c1 and c2
this this graph actually has two points where the slope is equal to the average slope between
the two points that's what the mean value theorem states is that there's a point in the middle
that has the same tangent slope as the secant from a to b
so first I mentioned the requirements of the mean value theorem it's always important to check
the requirements is it differentiable is it continuous
so we could ask the question does the mean value theorem
apply
or maybe it'd be better to say when does the mean value theorem apply
let's change it to that when does
the mean value theorem apply
to y equals the square root of x squared minus x minus two
well we could take the derivative of just about any point and it's continuous at just about every
point except for one important point or one important thing what's under the square root
must always be greater than or equal to zero so what we're really saying is x squared minus x minus
two must be greater than or equal to zero for the mean value theorem to apply because that's the
only time it's actually continuous well if we factor that we get x minus two times x plus one
is greater than or equal to zero and so we find out we've got these two potential solutions of two
and negative one and we want to know when those solutions are positive specifically
so if I make a little graph here you can see we've got a zero at negative one and zero at two
it's an x squared graph so we should know it's a parabola and specifically we want the graph to be
positive we know it's positive on the left and the right but negative in the center when it's
negative in the center the graph's not continuous so the range when the mean value theorem applies
when it's actually continuous is from negative infinity to negative one
and actually we'll include the negative one because it's continuous at zero
union from two to infinity these are the points on which our
graph is positive the graph of what's under the square root is positive meaning we can actually
take the square root it's actually continuous on those points so those are the only ranges when
the mean value theorem would apply we could even ask more directly does the mean value theorem apply
to maybe y equals the natural log of 5x minus one over the interval from zero to three
well we know the domain of the natural log what's inside the natural log must be greater than zero
it can't even be equal to zero so what we need to check is 5x minus one greater than zero going to
put us outside of the range of zero to three that this problem's interested in add one
5x is greater than one divide by five x is must be greater than one fifth
so we would say no the mean value theorem does not apply apply because it is undefined
from zero to one fifth if we are just going from one to three the mean value theorem would work
because it's defined on all those points it's continuous on all those points but because
it's discontinuous from zero to one fifth the mean value theorem will not apply over the range of zero
to three let's try another one y equals e to the three x squared minus one
with e and with x squared and with multiplication and with subtraction we know the graph is
continuous there's no jumps no breaks no holes no gaps it's also differentiable on the entire graph
the derivative we'd have to use a nice little chain rule but if we took the derivative
it would be e to the three x squared minus one times the derivative of the top stuff which is 6x
and the minus one goes to zero but this is also defined on all points so there's nowhere this is
not this is discontinuous there's nowhere where this is not differentiable i didn't even give the
range but let's just give it one because i should have let's say over negative two to two definitely
between negative two and two this is all defined so we would say yes the mean value theorem is going
to apply to this function on this range which means between negative two and two the average rate of
change can be found as an instantaneous rate of change we don't know where but we definitely know
it exists okay then let's see now that we've checked the requirements let's see if we can use
the mean value theorem first we're going to do it kind of visually i want to graph
graph this function and connect the a and b and then show tangent lines
there's at least one there might be more so i'll put the s in parentheses with the same slope
so the graph we're working with is f of x equals x cubed minus 6x squared plus 8x
so let's take an x out to try and graph it gives us x squared minus 6x plus 8
continuing to factor that's x minus 2 times x minus 4 and so we have zeros at x equals 0, 2, and 4
and so we should be able to graph this before we graph this let's go ahead and figure out what the
slope is between the points between the edges i didn't even give a range let's do the range on
negative one to six so let's find f of negative one and f of six and we'll have our calculator help
with that just to make it a little quicker we have x cubed minus 6x squared plus 8x
and i'll go to my table let's delete out the values we don't want at negative one it's equal to negative 15
and at six it's equal to 48
so we had negative 15 and 48 so this graph's not going to be really to scale
but at negative one and then one two three four five six up here is going to be 48
which means we've got about negative 15 down here somewhere
we have a zero at zero
two and four we know at six it's equal to 48
and at negative one it's negative 15 so this graph's going to come in go up go down and up
but what this problem really wants us to do is connect the end points with this line
and then go ahead and just show graphically that we can draw a parallel line that's tangent
to the graph at least at one point and you notice there's two points where those lines are parallel
probably a little too steep there well too far the other direction
uh tricky there we go
parallel lines same slope tangent to the points on the graph between
our a and our b between negative one and negative six
but just doing it graphically is a little boring let's actually find the points
let's find the points
c where we get that average rate of change is equal to the instantaneous rate of change
or f prime of c the derivative at c is f of b minus f of a over b minus a
and let's go ahead and do the same function that we did up above we're going to do f of x
equals x cubed minus six x squared plus eight x on the same range of negative one comma six
and we're trying to find these black dots that we just found where are those points
that we're going to get the same slope as the average slope
well first let's find the average slope that's f of b minus f of a over b minus a
or f of six using the endpoints minus f of negative one over six minus negative one
and we just saw that f of six is equal to 48
minus f of negative one is negative 15 over six minus negative one so we have 63
over seven which is equal to a nice pretty nine
so we want to know when the derivative is going to be equal to nine
so we're going to find the derivative f of f prime of x which is three x squared
minus 12x plus eight we want to know when that's equal to the average slope or equal to nine
well we need to subtract nine from both sides to make it equal to zero three x squared minus
12x minus one equals zero and you might see that that's not going to factor very nicely
so let's see rx then using the quadratic formula is equal to 12
plus or minus the square root of 12 squared minus four times three times negative one
all over two times three and when I do that on my calculator
I'll end up with two values first if we subtract you get negative
point zero eight and four point zero eight
so my graph's not really to scale but we would have hit those slopes at negative point zero eight
and four point zero eight so I went through and made a graph that was more to scale than the one
that we had before the red curve that you see here is our function that we've been working with
and then what I did is I put a dot at negative one comma negative 15 and six comma 48 and you
can see I've connected them with this orange line then what I did is I put a purple dot here at the
first point that we had the negative point zero eight and drew a tangent line I also put a dot at
the second point that we found at four point zero eight and drew a tangent line and you see that
those blue tangent lines are perfectly parallel to the orange tangent line and what that means is
that the instantaneous rate of change at those two points on those blue lines is equal to the
average rate of change of the orange line that connects the two endpoints and that's visually
how the mean value theorem works so our two answers do work the mean value theorem is
right there on your screen the big thing we're talking about today
is that if the function is continuous and differentiable between the two endpoints
there exist at least one point C such that the instantaneous rate of change is equal to the
average rate of change or the slope between the two points take a look at the assignment and try
a few of these and we'll take a closer look at them in class the derivatives can tell us a whole
bunch about the shape of a graph of a function and that's what we're going to look at today we're
going to answer the question what do derivatives tell us
about the shape of a graph
first thing we're going to look at is what is called the first derivative test
and to kind of set up what the first derivative test does i'm going to draw a little picture here
actually three pictures three little graphs and we're going to compare what the derivative is
doing on each so here is some function f kind of curving upwards we'll have some function f
curving downwards and then we'll have a function f that comes up to a point and we're going to
be interested particularly at a point c kind of in the middle of both of the are all three of these
and what the derivative is doing at each one of those now we know the derivative is the slope of
the tangent line at that point and so if i draw my point and the tangent line for the one that's
go increasing for the one that's curving upwards you see the slope is also going upwards in other
words if the function f of x is increasing the derivative f prime of x is positive
and similarly at the point c on the curve that's decreasing or going down you'll see that the
slope of the tangent line is going downhill it is negative so we'll say that when f of x is decreasing
the derivative f prime of x is negative
now at the peak here on the third graph you'll notice that it's neither increasing or decreasing
and in fact the tangent line is completely flat
at that point so if f of x is neither increasing nor decreasing then f prime of x
is zero which is neither positive nor negative now we recognize that point
as a point when the derivative is zero we call that a critical point we already know that critical
points are where the derivative is zero it's either a maximum or a minimum value
so let's summarize that conclusion in the actual test the first derivative test
what we're going to do with the first derivative test to learn about the function
is first we're going to find all critical points
and as a reminder that's when f prime of x is equal to zero or it's undefined
once we find those points we can use those points to divide
f prime of x into subregions
and then we can test each subregion
and we'll find out where the derivative is zero that's going to be where the graph levels out
and then we'll know in between those points is the graph increasing or decreasing
based on what the derivative is doing so let's see if we can use that test with an example here
the example we're going to play with is f of x
equals x cubed minus 12x we're going to decide where is the derivative zero where is it increasing
where is it decreasing well first we have to know the derivative f prime of x is equal to
3x squared minus 12 and to find those critical points we set it equal to zero
so if i add 12 to both sats actually let's just factor it uh let's do 3 times x squared minus
four equals zero three times x plus two times x minus two equals zero so our critical points
are x equals negative two and positive two those are our critical points
then what we're going to do is we're going to divide
kind of a number line into those subregions we've got negative two and positive two
and we know at those points the derivative is zero the graph is flat at those points
so what's f prime in those regions
the easiest way to test that is we're going to go to our calculator on the calculator we're
going to hit the y equals button and type in our derivative function so we know if the derivative
is positive or negative the derivative function was 3x squared minus 12 and we'll go to our table
second table let's delete out the old values now first we need to test a point in each of
these three regions left of negative two between negative two and positive two and right of two
so left of negative two we can pick any number let's pick negative five
and we see it's a positive 63 so left of negative two the derivative is positive
what that means is that f the function left of negative two is actually increasing
because the derivative is positive
between negative two and two let's put the number zero in it's negative 12 the derivative is negative
between which means the function itself is decreasing between negative two and two
greater than two maybe pick the number positive five it's positive all we care about is the sign
and so that tells us that it is increasing over that range
now we know where the graph is increasing decreasing and then increasing again it's
giving us a general idea of the shape of the graph but there's more to the graph than just
whether it's increasing or decreasing it helps to know what direction or how it is curving
is it curving when it goes up on this left part is it curving up or is it curving
up those are two very different curves in red there we need to know what type of curve
it's doing as it's increasing and that leads us to our next topic the next thing the derivatives
tell us about the graph and this is what we call concavity now concavity might be a new
concept to us so let's set it up first with a little bit of vocabulary
the first word we need to know is what is concave up concave up means it the graph itself
appears to be rotating counterclockwise
and if you think about a general parabola starting from the left you see it rotates counterclockwise
as you draw the parabola you also could have something approaching an asymptote kind of giving
a counterclockwise rotation or even if it was increasing a counterclockwise rotation
going from left to right you're moving around the circle counterclockwise
and that kind of makes sense counterclockwise if we think about our unit circle which we're
very familiar with we count unit circles counterclockwise so that's a positive concave up
motion going counterclockwise
another way that i like to think about concave up is if i think about the parabola it looks like
the u of concave up and that reminds me that u up is concave up as you might expect the next word
is concave down and here we are rotating clockwise
or if you think about the unit circle in the negative direction if you start from the left
a negative parabola is concave down it's going clockwise around and you could also get things
approaching asymptotes in much the similar way these all are concave down
and as you might expect with calculus we're interested in when we switch between a concave
up motion and a concave down motion just like when we switch from increasing and decreasing
we have critical points with concavity when we switch between concave up and concave down
what we end up with are called inflection points
and that is where the concavity changes
for example the graph could be first concave up and then it's going to switch to concave down
right in the center there you see the rotation direction changes starts out going clockwise
or counterclockwise then it changes to clockwise the classic x cubed also let's see this one
starts out going counterclockwise and then turning it to clockwise you start concave up and then you
change to concave down in the middle those are inflection points where the concavity changes
and just like a critical point is when the derivative is equal to zero concavity can
also be found the way we find those inflection points is we look at the second derivative
f prime prime of x and see when it's zero or undefined
now concavity tells us a whole lot when it's combined with the first derivative test and
whether the graph is increasing or decreasing let's look at concavity
and increasing
decreasing relationships
and to set this up we're going to do a little tic-tac-toe board here
and we're going to look at what happens if the graph is increasing
and it's concave up if it's increasing and concave up we have to rotate counterclockwise
as we increase
contrast that with increasing and concave down
now as we are increasing we have to rotate clockwise which takes us off in the other direction
similarly we can compare what happens when we are decreasing
if we are decreasing and we're concave up as we go down we have to rotate counterclockwise
versus if it's decreasing and concave down as we rotate it has to rotate downward clockwise
so if we know both of these facts about the graph we will very quickly know the shape of the graph
and what is going on at various points
and we test for concavity
very similar to how we test the first derivative test except instead of finding critical points
first we find inflection points
and once we find those inflection points we can divide
the second derivative f prime prime of x into subregions
and again we will test each subregion
so let's take a look at just doing that test for concavity
and then we'll bring it together here in just a minute
so number four going back to that same example we had before
where f of x is equal to x cubed minus 12x
we already said the first derivative was 3x squared minus 12
the second derivative then we can quickly calculate to be 6x
and so we're going to divide the number line
into subregions based on those inflection points
based on when that second derivative equals zero
we'll divide both sides by six and x equals zero is my inflection point
and so rate at zero is where we are going to split up the f prime prime to see what's happening
where is the second derivative positive and negative
going to y equals now i'm going to clear out the second derivative
or the first derivative we'll put in the second derivative equation which is just 6x
and then go to the table to lead out what i don't need
and i might have been able to do this in my head in fact i should be able to do this one in my
head but just to show you for the more complex equations i'm going to test something to the
left of zero maybe negative five and i see the second derivative is zero is negative
then we'll test something to the right of zero maybe positive five
and we'll see the second derivative is positive
so we've divided into subregions we know where the second derivative is positive and negative
now we know if our function the original function x cubed minus 12 is concave up or concave down
we see on the left it's negative so it is concave
down to begin with up until zero where it becomes concave up
so we know on the left it's going to have some type of clockwise motion
on the right it's going to have some type of counterclockwise motion kind of run out of space
okay now that we know how these tests all work
let's bring it all together
with our function f of x equals x cubed minus 12x
the first derivative which i'm going to always represent in blue here is 3x squared minus 12
and we know if we make that equal to zero we found out earlier that gave us critical points
at negative two and positive two the second derivative i'm going to represent now in green
is going to be 6x which when we made that equal to zero that gave us inflection point at zero
i strongly encourage you color code your critical points and your inflection points
so you don't get them confused as you're breaking up into subregions here
we know we've got critical points at negative two and two so these guys are going to split
up my f prime my first derivative i've got an inflection point at zero so that's how i'm going
to split up the second derivative of f prime prime and ultimately we're interested in what's
happening to our function f in each of these regions there's not actually a lot of space to the
left so i'm going to rewrite that give myself give myself a little more space f f prime and f prime
prime okay first in green to the left of zero we found out the second derivative was negative
so we know it's going to be concave down to the right of zero we found out that the second
derivative was positive and so we know there that the graph is concave up
in blue in the middle the first derivative to the left of two now we're looking at the blue lines
ignoring the green lines to the left of two we found out the second derivative was positive
which meant the graph is increasing between negative two and positive two we found out the
second derivative was negative which means the graph is decreasing between those points
to the right of two we found out that the second that the first derivative was positive and so we
know the graph is increasing so now at the very top in red we should have an idea what the graph
of f is doing left of negative two we see that we're concave down and increasing
so concave down and increasing the graph is going to curve clockwise while increasing
then between negative two and zero we see it's still concave down but it's decreasing
decreasing in concave down is going to go clockwise and downward
but after zero we're still decreasing but the graph is concave up which means it's going to
rotate its curve to be concave up as it's decreasing
to the right of two it is concave up and increasing so we're rotating counterclockwise
as we increase now we have a lot better idea of what's happening with this graph
let's see if we can actually make our graph
and i'm not going to put anything on the y-axis yet because we don't quite have those
what we do know about the graph is and i'm going to put a little dotted line
it's not it's just to kind of mark right there now negative two is going to be some type of
critical point so i should expect it to level off when it hits the blue line at two is another
critical point so i should expect it to level off when it hits that blue line
and then at zero is going to be my inflection point where the rotation changes
okay we know our graph increases and rotates clockwise up to a critical point
then it's going to decrease continuing to rotate clockwise until it hits an inflection
point where the rotation should change but it should still be decreasing
until it hits a critical point and then we keep rotating counterclockwise as we increase
and i want to notice all the elements of our graph it starts out increasing
then it's decreasing then it's increasing
it starts out rotating clockwise until the inflection point when it rotates counterclockwise
giving us the concave down on the left and concave up on the right
and this is how the derivatives can help us get a very good idea of the shape of the function
try a few of these on your own come back to class ready to discuss them and we will see you then
now that we've taken a look at concavity and increasing and decreasing functions
we've just got a little bit to add to our conversation as we look at how
do we graph
functions
with calculus
and the main missing piece we have right now is what happens with limits at infinity
basically what happens is we take the limit as x goes to infinity of our function f of x
or what happens as the limit as x goes to negative infinity of our function f of x
and the big idea we look for here is we consider
kind of a who takes over
as x gets large
so for example if i wanted to do the limit as x goes to infinity of 3x squared minus 7x
plus 5 all over 5x cubed plus 2x squared minus 7
who's going to take over in this case well in the numerator
the 3x squared will take over because x squared is bigger than any x or any constant
so when we square really big numbers it's going to become huge
and in the denominator the x cubed is going to take over because it's got the highest exponent
in fact what we could also say is that the x cubed is going to get bigger
faster than the numerator what we're really saying is the numerator is going to be whatever
it becomes but the denominator is going to become the biggest part of this function that 5x cubed
is just going to become huge faster than any other part of this function well if we take any old
number and divide it by just a huge number as x gets close to infinity dividing by a huge number
is going to basically leave nothing left and you can see that this limit as x goes to infinity
is basically going to equal zero
similarly if i wanted to look at the limit as x goes to infinity
of 3x cubed minus 5x plus 1 over 1x cubed plus 6x minus 2
similarly we can see in the numerator the x cubed the 3x cubed begins to take over the
numerator as it becomes huge and in the denominator the regular x cubed takes over
but as we can see neither one of those is going to get bigger faster
so essentially they are going to get bigger at the same rate because whatever we cube in
the numerator we're also cubing in the denominator and essentially that part that's cubed will reduce
or divide out the x cubes divide out leaving behind on the biggest part 3 over 1 or in this
case just the number 3 because the x cubes ultimately as they become huge divide out
and everything else is too small to worry about we're just left with 3
compare that
with the limit as x goes to let's do negative infinity this time
of 6x minus 2 over the square root of 4x squared plus 3x i'm going to scroll up a bit
so we can see better
the numerator we can see the 6x takes over that's six times some huge negative number
which means that 6x becomes a large negative in the numerator
square in the denominator the 4x squared takes over
but we're taking the square root of that and so that becomes the square root of 4x squared taking
over but notice that reduces to 2x and because we square the negative that's x squared the negative
squared becomes a positive so 2x is actually a large positive number
and that again is because the x squared makes that part positive times a positive is positive
and the square root is still positive so ultimately what we've ended up with
is the x's 6x over 2x where the x's can essentially divide out
but not the negative the negative is still there as x goes to negative infinity the
numerator is going to go to negative 6 while the denominator goes to 2 giving us a final
limit at infinity of negative 3
and this is kind of the game we keep playing as we look at solving these limits at infinity
we look at who's taking over what's happening 2x as it gets huge whether positive or negative
and we have to be very careful with what's happening with the signs is it positive or negative
so if i want the limit as x goes to infinity of x cubed minus 6x over x squared plus 5
again in the numerator the x cubed is going to take over in the denominator the x squared is
going to take over but what you see is they're not growing at the same rate this time the numerator
grows faster because cubed is going to get huge faster than squared will get huge
and so similar to our first example we're going to end up with a big number divided by something
that's much smaller that's not growing at the same rate so if i take a huge number and divide it by
something small i'm still going to be huge and so in this case this one's actually going to keep
getting bigger up to infinity we need this concept of the limit as x goes to infinity
to see what's happening with the in behavior or on the far left or the far right of the graph
the first example we took a look at on the far edge of the graph to the right towards infinity
this graph is approaching an asymptote at zero the second example at infinity is approaching an
asymptote at three the third example at negative infinity is approaching an asymptote at negative
three well the fourth example is not approaching an asymptote at all it's just going off to infinity
forever getting bigger we're going to combine this concept of limits at infinity with all the other
stuff we've seen about graphing a function so first our general strategy let's get everything
down in one place that we know about how to graph a function first it's helpful to find the domain
where is the graph or the function undefined do we have a hole do we have a vertical asymptote
what's going on with the domain the second thing that we found back in pre-calculus days was we
found the x and y intercepts
then we're going to add what we talked about today which is finding the limit as x goes to
infinity of f of x and the limit as x goes to negative infinity of f of x because that's going
to tell us the end behavior or what's happening at the edge of the graph does it approach an
asymptote or does it go off to infinity speaking of asymptotes we can also find any vertical asymptotes
those are going to come from the domain not the holes the holes and the vertical asymptotes come
from the domain but specifically the vertical asymptotes will want to label if there are any
then using and i'm going to always do this one in blue using f prime of x
identify the critical points
and increasing
decreasing regions
that's what we talked about in our previous video from section 4.5 the first derivative test
then using and i'll always do this in green f prime prime of x or the second derivative
identify inflection points
and concavity is it concave up or concave down and when we put all this together we
should have a very good idea of what this graph looks like before ever touching the
graph button on our calculator so let's see if we can work through one example
and graph f of x equals x cubed minus 3x plus 2
and i'll work through all the pieces we just talked about first the domain
there's cubing adding subtracting multiplying here no restrictions on those the domain is
all real numbers so nothing fancy there to find x intercepts
we set the whole thing equal to zero i should do a different color here
let's say zero equals x cubed minus 3x plus 2 and i'm going to use the rational root theorem
and synthetic division to find these zeros the options are plus or minus one and plus or minus
two so let's try first x equals one one zero negative three and two don't forget the zero for the x
squared bring down the one bring down the one one times one is one negative two
oops getting ahead of myself negative two and zero so that did work so x equals one
is a zero and now i have one x squared plus one x minus two equals zero which is x plus two times
x minus one bring down the other factor that we got of x plus one
oops not x plus one we got to subtract one from both sides
so that's x minus one and since we've got two matching guys we're going to say that
x plus two times x minus one squared equals zero so x is equal to negative two and positive one
those are the x intercepts for the y intercepts the y intercepts we only have to make the x is all
equal to zero so we get zero cubed minus three times zero plus two which is two so y equals
two is our y intercept part c is to look at the limit and i'm going to scroll up to give us a
little more room as x goes to infinity of our function x cubed minus three x plus two
and you see the x cube takes over so if we cube infinity what we end up with
is just infinity but we also need to consider the other limit as x goes to negative infinity
off the left of our graph of x cubed minus three x plus two
again the x cube takes over because it gets bigger faster than anything else
but this time we're cubing a negative large number when we cube a negative large number
we'll get a negative larger number so this on the left side is going to go to negative infinity
so we know from the left it's towards negative infinity and it's going to exit on the right
towards positive infinity vertical asymptotes vertical asymptotes come from um
let me write down vertical asymptotes
vertical asymptotes come from when the denominator equals zero but we have no fraction here with
this function so there are none with fractions you'll have to be careful of those
e is our first derivative test finding the critical points and where it's increasing or decreasing
so f of x again was x cubed minus three x plus two so our derivative is three x squared minus three
and we find our critical points by making it equal to zero factor out of three x squared minus one
x plus one x minus one so our critical points are negative one and positive one
we're going to combine that with the information from part f which is the second derivative
the first derivative we already have so taking the second derivative there is six x
set that equal to zero and so x is equal to zero becomes an inflection point
now for the sake of our graph it's going to be helpful to know uh well actually let's
over here to the right first let's make our number line we're going to break it up with an inflection
point at zero and a critical point at negative one and positive one
so the critical point split it up into three regions the inflection point splits it into two regions
so we can consider what's happening with f prime prime f prime and ultimately learn about f
okay on my calculator here i'm going to hit y equals in y one i'm going to type in the original
function because it's going to give me some key points that i'm going to want to actually know
their exact coordinates so in y one my first the function is x cubed minus three x plus two
my y two this is the first derivative three x squared minus three
y three is my second derivative of six x
and now i'm going to go second table and delete out this information i don't want
first thing i'm going to do is figure out the exact coordinates of the critical points and
the inflection points my critical points were at negative one and one and the inflection point is
at zero what's nice is that gives me the coordinates of negative four one and one zero as my critical
points so we have negative one comma four and one comma zero as my critical points
we're going to need those in a minute and the other thing we pulled off the calculator was
that the inflection point zero is at zero comma two we're going to need that inflection point
here in just a minute now let's see if we can learn what's happening in each of the regions
that we've mapped out here for our graph actually what i'm going to do is i'm going to go to y equals
and i'm going to highlight the equals on y one because i don't care about f right now
i just care about uh what's happening with the first derivative and the second derivative
so if i highlight the equals and hit enter you'll see it's no longer highlighted now when i go to
second table it's just going to tell me y two and y three so first for the second derivative
that's in the third column there the second derivative we need something to the left of zero
about negative five
to the left of zero you see y three the second derivative is negative
so my second derivative is negative it is concave down to begin with it's rotating clockwise to begin
with to the right maybe at positive five you see the second derivative is y three it's positive
so it's positive on the right which means it's concave up
now let's go to the blue the first derivative we want to know if it's positive or negative
so we know if it's increasing or decreasing y two has my first derivative in it so i'm looking at
this column first we need something to the left of negative one we already have negative five
and notice it's a positive number so it starts out positive which means it is increasing initially
something between negative one and one would be zero notice the derivative is negative
so it's negative which means it's decreasing until the next critical point
something to the right of one we could use the number five that we already have which is positive
so we know it's increasing after that point
then we're going to put this all together to decide with increasing decreasing concave up and
concave down what's the general shape in each of these four regions starting out concave down
counterclockwise rotation but increasing we know our graph starts going up with a clockwise rotation
still concave down after the critical point but now decreasing it's going to go down with that concave
down motion from the bottom of that though after zero after that inflection point it needs to be
concave up but still decreasing so you'll start to see the rotation go counterclockwise after zero
but then start increasing after the critical point at one still concave up and so we can
kind of see the shape the direction it's going to go kind of like an upside down parabola it's
going to turn to an upside up parabola notice it exits at negative infinity on the left like we
expect it goes off to positive infinity on the right like we'd expect we're going to put all
this information together to make our final big graph
all right first let's go through our list of things we discovered
the domains all real numbers but we have x intercepts at negative two and one
we did those in purple we had x intercepts at negative two and positive one
we also have a y intercept at two so at two there's a y intercept
we know on the left it's going off at negative infinity on the right it's going off at positive
infinity we also know that there is a critical point and i'm going to do this in blue so i don't
miss my colors critical points at negative one four and a critical point at one comma zero
which is also one of our intercepts
we also know there's an inflection point at zero comma two which is also one of our intercepts
but that is an inflection point where it's going to switch rotation from positive
oops start sorry it starts negative from a negative rotation to a positive rotation
so we should see it comes in from the negative starts out increasing with a negative rotation
hits the critical point and now it's decreasing but once it hits that inflection point the rotation
is going to change direction hits the critical point and now it's increasing and now we've got
our graph of our function notice just like we expected the first derivative told us it starts
increasing then decreasing then increasing the second derivative says it's concave down or a
negative rotation then concave up or a positive rotation switching at that inflection point
and that is how we can graph our functions using calculus there's a lot of pieces so you do need
to practice this so take a look at the book the assignment and we'll see you in class to discuss
this further all this conversation around graphs the shapes of graphs when the derivative equals
zero to find key points has a very important application and that is in what we call the
applied optimization problems so our question that we're going to attempt to answer is how
do we optimize
or find the most efficient the fastest the biggest the smallest
how do we optimize a value of interest
and ultimately what we're really asking is when does the derivative equal zero because that's the
peak or the valley that's the optimal point for the most efficient or most profit or at least
expense or shortest distance or shortest time that we're trying to get after so let's take a look
at a few of these classic optimization problems and then from there you should be able to solve
lots of different types of optimization problems the first classic problem is what we call the
rectangle problem where we're generally trying to either minimize the perimeter maximize the area
something related to that effect so let's say a farmer
has 80 feet of fencing
to enclose a pasture
along a rock wall
what that means is he only has to actually fence three sides of the wall not all four sides of the
wall so what dimensions
would maximize the area
so let's draw a picture to kind of see what's going on we've got this rock wall already
and what this farmer is going to do is he's going to make a fence
that goes alongside that rock wall so he's really only fencing three sides
and we need to give variables to the sides as we calculate the area because that's what we want
to maximize so we'll say it's an x by y fence which means the other side's also x if we're
thinking about perimeter and we know that the area of any rectangle is equal to the length times the
width or in this case x times the y but that gives us two variables so we need to constrain
one of those variables so that we can switch reduce it down to one variable and that's going
to come from the limit we're given is that we have 80 feet of fencing available to us well if
there's 80 feet available to us that means the total distance x plus y plus x or 2x plus y
that total distance has to equal the 80 feet of fencing
well the easiest variable to solve for here would probably be y so we'll subtract 2x
and we'll say that y is equal to 80 minus 2x and we'll replace the y in our area formula
to be 80 minus the 2x
to make life easier we'll go ahead and distribute so area is equal to 80x minus 2x squared
and we want to maximize this area so if we think about maybe the graph of the area the area is
going to increase to a certain point and then come down after that point we're looking to find that
maximum point and we know at that point the slope of the derivative is equal to zero
so let's find the derivative of the area in terms of x the derivative of the area is equal to 80
minus 4x and we just need to make that equal to zero to find the critical point where this fence
area is optimized add the 4x to both sides and 80 equals 4x divide both sides by 4 and x is equal to 20
now that we know where that maximum occurs we plug that in for x and the y equals equation
y equals 80 minus 2 times 20 or 80 minus 40 which is 40
so for the farmer to maximize the area of his three-sided fence along the rock wall
he should do a 20 foot by 40 foot fence
and I think fence actually has a c in it
20 foot by 40 foot fence and that's the idea of the rectangle problem
let's try another problem this is probably one of the most classic problems of all calculus
what I'm going to call the run and swim problem
and rather than write this all out I'm just going to kind of draw a picture and narrate
what I'm talking about we've got this river that's water does that look like a river
we've got this river and a person is on one side of the river
and he wants maybe a pot of gold that's on the other side of the river
it is going to be nine miles down the river
is where that pot of gold is but the river is also two miles wide
what this person can do is he's going to run along the river aways
then he's going to jump in the water and swim diagonally across aways
what we want to know is how far should he run so we'll call the running x
before he starts swimming in order to get to that pot of gold in the most efficient quickest way
possible well we need to know a few things about this person let's say the person runs
six miles per hour and swims three miles per hour
so how far should the person run that's right at the question how far should the person
run before swimming
well let's see if we can get a little more information on this
the swim distance let's call that swim distance y so we've got it labeled and then
we're going to have this gap here on this right triangle we already know the height of the triangles
two but that gap if the total distance from the person to the pot of gold is nine and he runs
or she runs x it's going to be nine minus x is what's going to be left horizontally
let's give ourselves a little bit more workspace
well we should remember that the formula for distance is equal to rate
times time and we're trying to minimize the time so let's go ahead and solve this for time
and we'll say time is equal to the total distance divided by the rate
and we know that the person is going to be running
at a rate of six miles per hour so the run time
is going to be the distance we don't know x divided by the rate or six miles per hour
while the swim time is going to be the distance divided by the rate the swim time the y the
diagonal we don't know or the swim distance the y the diagonal we don't know but we do know the
rate at which the person swims is three miles per hour so the total time is equal to the
sum of these things x over six plus y over three the other thing we're going to use to our advantage
is we have a right triangle formed on the edge of the river
Pythagorean theorem tells us that nine minus x squared plus the height which is two squared
is equal to the swim distance which is y squared
doing a little simplifying squaring the two gives us four but we want to get rid of the
y squared so taking the square root of both sides we'll have nine minus x squared plus four
under the square root is equal to y so let's replace the y in our time equation
with that information time is equal to x over six plus the square root of nine minus x squared
plus four over three
this time is what we want to minimize in other words the graph here is going to come down
to some point and we need to find out what point has a slope of zero on its tangent line
and the way we do that is we take the derivative and set the derivative equal to zero
square roots are a little bit more work to take the derivative of so let's actually rewrite this
with a one half power so we have x over six plus the nine minus x squared plus four to the one
half power over three because that's going to be easier to take a derivative of
so the derivative of the time the derivative of x over six is just one over six plus
let's make a big fraction and we'll do this piece by piece first the one-thirds a constant
so that's going to be out front we can bring the exponent of one half out front as we take
the derivative which means we've got a two in the denominator and a one in the numerator
then we reduce the exponent by one which makes it to the negative one half power
the negative one half power the negative exponent moves it down to the denominator
so now we've got nine minus x squared plus four to the one half but in the denominator
because of the negative exponent
then we have to multiply by the derivative of the inside using our chain rule
so we've got this little piece the nine minus x squared that we can take the derivative of
brings the two out front times the nine minus x
reduce the exponent by one just leaves nine minus x
and then we have to multiply by the derivative of inside that
and the derivative of negative x is negative one
let's see if we can clean that up a little bit what I notice is we've got two's that divide out
which is nice
so oh let's take this negative and do a positive times a negative is a negative so we've got one
sixth minus we're left with the nine minus x in the numerator
let's do this in brown actually it's a better color we've got one sixth minus nine minus x is
left in the numerator and that's it so I don't really need the parentheses
over three and let's go ahead and take that one half and make it back into a square root
times nine minus x squared plus four
and we know when this derivative equals zero we've got our minimum time
switch over to purple we're going to add that first fraction to the other that second
fraction to the other side giving us one sixth equals nine minus x over three square roots
of nine minus x squared plus four
we now have two equal fractions we can solve two equal fractions by multiplying the diagonals
one times three times the square root is three square roots of nine minus x squared plus four
equals six times nine minus x
so go back to blue here as we solve square root is going to be annoying so let's square both sides
actually blues a bad color let's do green you get a little more contrast
square both sides and we know when we square both sides because it's all multiplying we square the
pieces three squared is nine squaring the square root gets rid of it so it's nine times nine minus
x squared plus four equals six squared is 36 times nine minus x squared
let's distribute the nine onto both parts here we'll give us nine times the nine minus x squared
plus nine times four is 36 equals 36 times nine minus x squared
and if we keep the nine minus x squareds as a group we see we've got 36 of them on the right
and nine of them on the left to make life easier let's subtract nine of these nine minus x squareds
from both sides that tells us that 36 equals 27 of these nine minus x squareds
divide both sides by 27
36 over 27 reduces to four thirds equals nine minus x squared
get rid of the squared with the square root of both sides and we get two over the square root of
three equals nine minus x and i'm going to add x to both sides and subtract oops it's
plus or minus two root three sorry that's important if we add x to both sides and add and
subtract the two root three from both sides we get an x is equal to nine plus or minus two
divided by the square root of three
pulling up our calculator to take a look at this we've got nine plus two
divided by the square root of three is one answer but what you notice is that gives us 10.15
going back to the original the whole distance was only nine if i go 10.15 i'm actually going past
my pot of gold and having to go backwards that's not the best strategy to go about
so we probably don't want that solution
so let's try again and we're going to do nine minus two divided by the square root of three
and we find out x the distance we should run is about 7.85
so this person's a really good runner he's going to run 7.85 miles before the person
jumps into the water and either she or he will swim the rest of the way
so now we know she or he's going to run 7.85 miles jump in the water and swim the rest of the
way to the pot of gold that'll be the quickest way to get to the pot of gold that's the run and swim
problem another classic problem is what i like to call the hallway problem
the hallway problem is best illustrated with a picture the idea is you've got a hallway that
goes around a corner but the width of the hallway is not the same on both sides maybe on one side
the hallway is 10 feet long and on the other side the hallway is 8 feet long
and the question becomes how long of a piece of furniture maybe some long picture
can you get around that corner
in this hallway as you move into the apartment around the corner
let's go ahead and write that out what is the longest
piece of furniture
to fit around the corner
well to set this up we need a little bit more information on here
one thing we're going to be interested in is what is the angle theta that we're going to be at
in order to maximize our distance now we know from geometry if i extend the wall from the top
side across this vertical angle across from it's going to have the exact same measurement
so we get a triangle to the left and if i drop a line down we have a triangle to the right
we actually have two similar triangles but one has a height of eight feet and the other one has a base
of 10 feet
also we're interested in the pieces of this furniture length
so we're going to label the left side x and the top right side y and we know that the total length
of my furniture is equal to x plus y but we don't like having two variables so we have to try and
use our relationships to reduce it down to one variable
and actually that one variable is going to be neither x or y it's going to be theta
the angle that connects them both with the 10 foot triangle from the theta we have the adjacent side
and the hypotenuse that we're working with that means we're going to use the cosine over there
we know that the cosine of theta is 10 over x
and with the other theta on the y we've got the opposite side and the hypotenuse
that tells us that the sine of theta is equal to 8 over y
solving both these equations for x and y we multiply by x and divide by the cosine
x is equal to 10 over the cosine of theta and y is equal to 8 over the sine of theta
but rather than dealing with the reciprocals of cosine and sine let's just use the reciprocal
trig functions and we'll say that x is equal to 10 secant of theta
and y is equal to 8 cosecant of theta
now we can replace x and y with these pieces and we've been reduced down to one variable
the length is equal to 10 secant theta
plus the y which is 8 cosecant of theta
now we've got our function we're just looking for the spot that maximizes our
distance or our size of our furniture where the slope is equal to zero
so we'll take the derivative l prime is equal to let's do this in a different color
let's go to brown l prime is equal to 10 the derivative of secant is secant tangent
secant theta tangent theta plus 8 the derivative of cosecant is negative cosecant
cotangent so instead of plus 8 let's say minus 8 cosecant
cotangent theta
and all we need to know is when this equation equals zero
well let's start by moving the negative part over to the right side
so we've got 10 secant theta tangent theta equals 8 cosecant theta cotangent theta
and probably the easiest way to solve this would be to change this all into signs and cosines
since we're more familiar with signs and cosines and seeing if we can establish
um what's happening here
so we'll make a fraction 10s in the numerator secant is 1 over cosine so it's 10 over we've
got a cosine theta tangent is sine over cosine so we've got a sine theta over cosine cosine times
cosine is cosine squared equals a fraction for the right side 8 cosecant is 1 over sine so that
puts a sine theta in the denominator and cotangent is cosine over sine so cosine theta over sine
theta we already have a sine theta so now it's sine theta or sine squared theta
let's clear out the fractions by doing the cross multiply trick we've done before
so we've got 10 sine times sine squared is sine cubed theta equals 8 cosine cubed theta
let's move the numbers to one side and the variables to the other side we're more comfortable with
tangent which is sine over cosine so let's move the cosines to the right we're gonna
or to the left we're going to divide both sides by cosine cubed theta
and we'll move the numbers to the right by dividing both sides by 10
sine cubed over cosine cubed is tangent cubed
the cosine cubes are gone 8 over 10 reduces to four fifths
get rid of the cube with the cube root of both sides
and then tangent of theta our angle is the cube root of four fifths
so theta is equal to the tangent inverse of the cube root of four fifths
or to make it easier on our well yeah let's just type that in our calculator
let's find out what theta our angle is equal to
we want to do the tangent inverse of the cubed root which is conveniently under math
option number four is a cube root of four fifths
and the tangent inverse of the cube root of four fifths is 0.7482
0.7482
but if you remember our picture our picture wasn't interested in the angle 0.7482 radians
that's what we just found is that angle we're interested in how long is the x and how long
is the y which means we have to come back to our x equals and our y equals equations in order to
find those pieces so we have x is equal to 10 over the cosine of our angle which is 0.7482
and y is equal to eight over the sine of our angle which is 0.7482
fortunately our calculator can do that for us quite nicely so we've got 10
divided by the cosine of 0.7482
and so that x distance is going to be 13.64
for our y distance eight divided by the sine of 0.7482
that y distance is 11.76
so for our final answer the total length of my furniture that can fit around the corner
the 13.64 plus 11.76 is going to be 25.4
feet i can fit anything that's 25.4 feet long around this corner it's any longer it won't fit
i can't take it into my new apartment and that's how we solve the hallway problem
so these applied optimization problems can come in many different forms but the
philosophy is always the same find out some relationship between the variables take the
derivative and set that derivative equal to zero and we can optimize either maximize or minimize
depending on the context almost any situation take a look at a few and try a few and we will
discuss it more in class
another application of the derivative is something that can help us solve limits that before
were unsolvable the question we're going to answer is how do we take a limit
of an indeterminate
form
and the way we're going to do that is with what is called
L'Hpital's rule now L'Hpital was a french mathematician who published this idea in a french
calculus text however he's probably not the one who came up with it it was probably one of the
Bernoulli mathematicians the Bernoulli's was a was a swiss family that were some of the most
amazing mathematicians ever and they all were from the same family and there's some evidence
that one of the Bernoulli's were the first to come up with it while L'Hpital was the first
to publish this rule or this trick to take the limit of an indeterminate form
but first before we can get into what the rule is let's make sure we understand what the heck is
an indeterminate form there's lots of indeterminate forms these are things that are technically
undefined but we know that limits often exist at points that are undefined and one of these
there's actually two really common ones that we're going to use is when the limit as x goes to some
number we'll call it a it could also go to infinity of f of x over g of x where we've got some fraction
but when we normally do a fraction with a limit we take the limit of the numerator and the limit of
a denominator and simplify what that comes out to but when that reduces to zero divided by zero
we say that is an indeterminate form we don't determine anything it doesn't necessarily mean
it doesn't exist zero divided by zero is indeterminate so we need to do another strategy in order to solve
the second indeterminate form really similar idea is the limit as x goes to a of f of x divided by g
of x sometimes will equal infinity over infinity and it could be either positive or negative
over a positive or negative infinity but this is also indeterminate because it turns out there
are different sizes of infinity and we don't know if we're dividing by the same size or different
size is it zero is it infinity is it one it could be lots of different things so if our limit is one
of these indeterminate forms lopital suggests the way we solve that using his rule if our limit
is an indeterminate form
it can be shown that the limit as x goes to a of that fraction f of x over g of x
is equal to the same limit as x goes to a but this time of f prime of x over g prime of x
and often this second limit is much easier to take in other words if we if we do a division
or a fraction with an indeterminate form we'll just take the derivative of the numerator
and the derivative of the denominator and calculate that limit so let's do some examples
where we do just that
first example we're going to take the limit as x goes to zero of sine x over x
now normally we plug zero into the numerator and the sine of zero is zero and we plug zero into
the denominator and that becomes zero so we're really saying is zero over zero
which is an indeterminate form so what we will do is we will take the limit
as x goes to zero of the derivatives of the top and bottom the numerator and denominator
the derivative of sine is cosine and the derivative of x is one so we're really saying
let's plug zero into the cosine of x so we'd have the cosine of zero
over the one is still one and the cosine at zero is one
so this limit as x approaches zero is actually approaching one and that's Lopital's rule
take the derivative of the numerator and the denominator and take the limit
let's try another one let's do the limit as x goes to one of the sine of pi x over the natural log of x
well if we plug one into both of these we get one times pi or the sine of pi
in the sine of pi the y-coordinate there is zero and the natural log of one
means e to the zero power is one so we've got zero over zero we have an indeterminate form
because we have the indeterminate form we can take the derivative of the top and bottom and find that
same limit the derivative of sine pi x is cosine pi x times the derivative of the inside which is pi
over the derivative of the natural log of x is one over x
well one over x that is dividing by a fraction it's the same as multiplying by the reciprocal
so i'm going to simplify this one step further and flip that fraction over and we have x pi cosine
pi x and now if we plug one in we get one times pi times the cosine of pi times one or one pi
so we have one times pi cosine of pi the x-coordinate pi is negative one
so we have one times pi times negative one which is negative pi
our limit as x goes to one is negative pi
this even works on problems with infinity that we've seen before let's say
remember when we were doing limits at infinity the limit as x goes to infinity
of three x squared plus two x minus one
over five x squared minus x plus one
and if you remember before when we were doing limits with infinity we said okay
the x squared is going to take over and so the x squared part gets huge
and then we end up dividing out the x squared and we're left with three-fifths
but let's solve this using another method using L'Hopital's rule because as x goes to infinity
the numerator becomes infinity squared times three plus two times infinity it's going to infinity
same thing with the denominator it's going to infinity we have infinity over infinity
which means we have an indeterminate form and we can take the derivatives of the numerator
and denominator that gives us six x plus two over five x minus one
nope ten x minus one sorry
but now if we plug infinity in we have six times infinity which goes to infinity
and then the denominator we've got 10 times infinity which goes to infinity
which means we still have an indeterminate form
but there's no reason we can't use L'Hopital's rule twice
so again we'll take the derivative the limit as x goes to infinity the derivative of the numerator
is six over the derivative of the denominator is ten and that's just a constant
doesn't matter what x is approaching it's a constant six tenths which reduces two three fifths
we can even use L'Hopital's rule with a one-sided limit let's say the limit as x goes to zero from
the right of the natural log of x over the cotangent of x
I might need a little bit more room here
now as x goes to zero from the right the natural log goes to negative infinity
and as cotangent goes to zero cotangent goes to zero remember cotangent is cosine over sine
cosine over sine is actually going to be an asymptote that guy's going to infinity
we have negative infinity over infinity we have another indeterminate form so we'll take the
derivative of the numerator and the denominator the derivative of the natural log is one over x
the derivative of cotangent is negative cosecant squared x
and let's actually simplify that
it's negative one over x sticks an x in the denominator and cosecant is the reciprocal
of sine so let's put the sine squared in the numerator
whoops I forgot the limit that's important the limit as x goes to zero from the right of sine
squared x negative over x
and now if we plug zero in the sine of zero is zero squared is zero
and if we plug zero in the denominator now goes to zero so all we've done is we've gone from
indeterminate form infinity over infinity to another indeterminate form zero over zero
so Lopital says we do it again the limit as x goes to zero from the right of
the derivative of negative sine well the negative stays there the derivative of sine squared is two
sine x times the derivative of the inside which is cosine x
over the derivative of x is one
now we can plug zero in and we'll actually get a solution
now we have negative two sine of zero cosine of zero
which is negative two times the sine of zero is zero the cosine of zero is one
and it simplifies down to a limit of zero
so this is the big idea of Lopital's rule if we have infinity over infinity
or zero over zero we'll take the derivative of both the numerator and denominator
so that we can take the limit and plug it in we might have to do it several times
but eventually we can get down to a limit
those are the indeterminate forms that Lopital's rule allows us to work with
but there are still other indeterminate forms
that you could end up with the general strategy we're going to imply for these other indeterminate
forms is that we need to make them
either zero over zero or plus or minus infinity over plus or minus infinity
we're going to massage them a little bit to try and make them
in two an indeterminate form
one classic indeterminate form is zero times infinity form
what's nice is the reciprocal of zero is infinity
so we're going to move that zero to the denominator and then we'll be in an indeterminate form
or the reciprocal of infinity is zero so we could do the reciprocal and move it to the
denominator because dividing by a reciprocal is the same as multiplying
and we'll end up with a form we can work with
here's what this looks like the limit as x goes to zero of x squared of the natural log of x
now x squared that's going to zero
but the natural log of zero natural log is approaching negative infinity so we've really
got zero times negative infinity
so we're going to rewrite this problem moving one piece down to the denominator as a reciprocal
so let's move the x squared down here so we'll have the limit as x goes to zero
of the natural log of x over x to the negative two or the reciprocal
x to the negative two would move that exponent up so you can see these are equivalent expressions
but now what we have is the natural log of x still approaching negative infinity
and x to the negative two or one over x squared is approaching infinity
and the reason that's going to zero is we have one divided by a teeny tiny number and we divide
by a teeny tiny number we get a huge number as a result so now we have the correct indeterminate
form we're ready to use Lopital's rule and we have the limit as x goes to zero of the derivative
of the numerator which is one over x over the derivative of the denominator which is negative
two x to the negative three cleaning that up a little bit
the negative two is going to stay in the denominator so the limit as x goes to zero
leave the negative two in the denominator but the x to the negative three moves up
and the one over x means it needs to move down
and actually that can clean up a little bit we have the limit as x goes to zero of x squared over negative two
and now we're ready to plug zero in for the x when we plug zero in for the x we get zero
square divided by negative two which is just zero
so how we handle that zero times infinity form is we move one piece to the denominator
using its reciprocal it's still equivalent that way and then we're in that indeterminate form
that we can use Lopital's rule on
another indeterminate form is when we have infinity minus infinity
if we have infinity minus infinity we need to find a way to combine these
to get a single fraction an example of this would be the limit as x goes to zero from the right
of one over x squared minus one over sine of x if we were to plug zero in we would have one over
zero which is infinity and the sine of zero is zero so we have one over zero which is infinity
and so we end up with infinity minus infinity which is not necessarily zero because they might be
different sizes of infinity so this is indeterminate form so we need to combine them into a single
fraction so that we can try and use Lopital's rule if we do in fact have an indeterminate form
common denominator would mean we multiply the first fraction by sine x over x
and the second fraction by x squared over x squared and that's going to give us
sine x minus x squared whoops forgot the limit part that's important the limit
as x approaches zero from the right of sine x minus x squared over x squared times sine x
now you'll see if we plug zero into the numerator the sine of zero is zero
minus zero squared is zero and in the denominator we multiply zero times zero to get zero
we have an indeterminate form which we can use so now we have the limit as x goes to zero from the
right of the derivative of sine is cosine x minus 2x over 2x times sine x using our product rule
plus x squared times negative cosine x so I'll make it oops sorry not negative cosine x
derivative of the sine is positive cosine so we have x squared times cosine x
now we have something that we can take the limit as x goes to zero on
let's break this down piece by piece so we can really see what's happening when we plug zero into
the cosine cosine of zero is one
minus so let's just hit equals cosine of zero is one minus two times zero
over two times zero sine of zero minus zero squared times the cosine of zero
well we still are ending up with zero in the denominator or we're getting closer and closer to zero
from the right because we end up with zero minus zero in the denominator
but as we get closer and closer to zero from the right what that really means we're doing
is we have left in the numerator is one one minus zero divided by something that is almost zero
because we're getting closer to zero from the right one divided by almost zero or one divided by
something really really small when we divide by tiny tiny tiny tiny things we end up with huge
answers and so this limit as x goes to zero from the right is going to be a positive infinity
let's try another one
another indeterminate form is when we have infinity to the zero power
it's not necessarily one might be one but not necessarily
for these we're going to use a logarithmic substitution to help us out to solve these problems
if we have the limit as x goes to infinity of x to the one over x
you'll notice the exponent one over infinity is going to zero and the base infinity
is going to infinity we have infinity to the zero power so we're going to rewrite it
using logarithmic substitution we're going to let y equal the stuff we're taking the limit of
one over the x natural log of both sides moves the exponent out front
and we're going to take the limit of what we ended up with
and know we can undo that natural log by taking e to whatever power we end up with as our limit or
our solution so we're going to take the limit as x goes to infinity of and we're going to write it
as a fraction natural log of x over x
because we know that natural log as x goes to infinity
also goes to infinity and so we now have infinity over infinity we can now use lopital's rule
the limit as x goes to infinity of one over x over one
which if we clean it up is the limit as x goes to infinity moving that x to the denominator of
one over x which we know we're doing one divided by
infinity or one divided by a huge number and when we divide by a huge number you're just left with
zero but that is the limit
of our natural log we have to undo the unnatural log by taking e to that power
e to the natural log of y is y so e to the zero
and i'll make a note here to undo the natural log
that we did the opposite of taking a natural log is e to the exponent
we take that a solution we had as our exponent and e to the zero is one
so our limit as x goes to infinity of x to the one over x is equal to one
let's try another one where we use that strategy again
where we take the natural log of y in order to help us solve this one turns out to be in the
zero to the zero form which is also indeterminate because a base of zero should have a zero for
a solution but an exponent of zero should have one for a solution so what is what is the solution
well it depends let's take the limit as x goes to zero from the right of x to the sine of x power
again you'll notice if we plug zero into the sine of x the sine of zero is zero
and then we have a base of zero so zero to the zero power is indeterminate
so we let y equal x sine of x and then we take the natural log of y
which moves the exponent out front so we have sine of x times the natural log of x
now again we're going to get rid of that natural log by taking e to our exponent
so we're going to actually calculate the limit as x goes to zero from the right of sine x
times the natural log of x
a problem is as sine goes to zero i'm sorry as x goes to zero sine goes to zero
and as natural log goes to zero
it goes to negative infinity
we've got zero times negative infinity we've done this form before this was number one
where we said we're going to move a reciprocal down into the denominator
let's use that exact same strategy here
we could move either one there is one that actually turns out to be easier and better
i'm going to come down on the next line to give me some space let's move the sine of x into the
denominator so the limit as x goes to zero from the right of the natural log of x
over the sine one over the sine of x has to be the reciprocal when we move it down
and actually what's nice is we know the reciprocal of the sine function
is the cosecant so we're really doing the natural log of x over the cosecant of x
which means now we've got the natural log going to as x goes to zero the natural log goes to
negative infinity and for the cosecant as x goes to zero cosecant goes to positive infinity
we have an indeterminate form that we can finally use lopital's rule on
so now we have the limit as x goes to zero from the right of the derivatives one over x over
the derivative of cosecant is negative cosecant cotangent
and let's clean that up the limit as x goes to zero from the right the one over x moves the x down
cosecant and cotangent are both very familiar reciprocal functions which will move them up
which will be very nice cosecant is the reciprocal of sine so negative sine x
and cotangent is the reciprocal of tangent
so negative sine x over x tangent of x let's keep cleaning this up i want to break this up into
two pieces let's break this up into the limit as x goes to zero from the right of the negative sine
x over x times the tangent of x because what's interesting there is we know we can use our
limit properties to break that up into the product the limit as x goes to zero from the right of
negative sine x over x times the limit as x goes to zero from the right of the tangent of x
and why would that be better well if you remember at the very start of our discussion
we solved the limit as x goes to zero of sine x over x we know that's equal to one
so coming down to our problem
we have that same limit we just have a negative sign which can come out front
so if sine x over x is one negative sine x over x is negative one
times plugging zero into tangent x tangent to sine over cosine sine of zero at zero so we have
zero over one which is zero which means negative one times zero we've got our limit at zero
let's not get too excited because remember we did that natural log substitution
so we have to undo that natural log substitution
by just taking e raised to our solution our solution was zero e to the zero is one
and so we ended up with one for our solution
so that's lopital's rule lopital's rule says we can take the derivative
of the numerator and denominator if we have an indeterminate form like zero over zero or
infinity over infinity at the limit however if it's not in one of those indeterminate forms
we're going to have to massage the problem a little bit to put it into a useful indeterminate form
we might do that by moving a piece to the denominator we might do that by combining
fractions into one or we might do that with logarithmic substitution take a look at these
give them a good practice and we will discuss them more in class
today we're going to address another question in applied calculus with derivatives and that is
how do i find the solution actually it might be better this is a a solution because sometimes
there's more than one to f of x equals zero
this question is going to give rise to what we call newton's method
and this is very similar actually to what your calculator is going to do to find solutions
to various equations now we already know
that if ax plus b equals zero all we have to do to solve for x is subtract b and divide by a and we
get our solution we also know that if it's a quadratic ax squared plus bx plus c equals zero
we also know we can solve for x using this simple quadratic equation of the opposite of b
plus or minus the square root of b squared minus 4ac all over 2a
and we also actually have a similar formula for cubic functions the cubic's a lot more involved
but one certainly does exist but outside of that we don't necessarily have a general solution method
to solve for equations that become more complex and more complicated and so what we do is we
use newton's method to kind of estimate the solution to any function to get an idea of what
we're doing we're first going to look graphically at what's happening
graphically what we are doing looks like this
say there's some function here that comes down up and around
and we want to know what is the zero what is the solution
to that function and it's not a real pretty number so we're going to have to estimate it
so what we will do then is we will guess as close as we can get
and we will call that our first guess we'll use x sub zero
and then we'll take that to the line and yes it's pretty close to our zero so to figure out what's
happening around there is we will use the tangent line and the tangent line is going to give us our
x one which is our next guess
and if we go to the line that's closer so what we will do is we will find the tangent line
which gets us even closer and we call that x two and then we go to the line and do another tangent
line and you see those tangent lines are going to keep getting closer and closer to our actual
zero until we can actually estimate its exact point so graphically what we're doing is we're
making a guess at x one then we go to f of x one and find the tangent line
and then this gives a better guess
and then we will call it x two so we find f of x two and find the tangent line
and you can see how we begin to repeat the process until we get close enough for our purposes
so if that's graphically the process let's look at the equation
of the tangent line
at x sub zero or our starting guess
well we know that y equals f of x naught the y coordinate plus the slope f prime
at x naught times x minus the x naught is the equation of the tangent line
but then we can find the point
x one on this line that hits zero
basically what we're saying is zero equals
the f of x naught plus f prime of x naught times x one our new guess the new x coordinate
minus x naught and then we will solve this equation for the x one
as we solve the equation for the x one you'll see that we'll first subtract off the f of x naught
then we'll divide out the f prime of x naught
and then we'll add the x sub zero which leaves the x sub one
all that to say this formula
tells us how to find the next point or maybe we can say it more generally x sub n
is equal to the previous guess x sub n minus one minus f of the point x sub n minus one
divided by the derivative x sub n minus one
this is going to be the important equation we're going to use to make it all work
let's do an example
and we're going to do all the ugly work on our calculator which is going to be really nice
so our first example f of x is equal to x cubed minus five x plus two and we want to know when
that equals zero to help us we'll do f prime of x the derivative which is three x squared minus five
and to get an idea of the shape of the graph let's go ahead and hit y equals
and i'm going to graph it we've got what x cubed minus five x plus two and when i graph it
you'll see the graph comes up down and back up and we're going to be interested in seeing
if we can figure out what is that value just to the right of the origin it looks like it's between
zero and one just to the right there what is that value so just kind of sketch a graph
the graph comes up down and up and we're trying to find this guy just to the right of the origin
that is between zero and one
i'm going to give you some calculator instructions that are going to save you a lot of work
what you're going to start by doing is we're going to put
f of x
into y2 the second row and then we're going to put the derivative f prime of x into y3
and then in y1
we're going to put our formula which is the x minus
the y2 equation at x divided by the y3 equation at x
into y1 and you'll notice that is exactly the newton's formula that we just found
where x is the n minus one y2 is the function y3 is the derivative of the function
and the way we grab the function is we type in vars go over to y vars and then we go over to function
so let's take a look at what that means y equals clear first i'm going to put f of x
into y2 so y2 is x cubed minus five x plus two then i put the derivative into y3
three x squared minus five enter and then i'll go up to y1 and for y1 we'll type in x
minus we need to grab the y2 equation right next to the arrows is the vars button
scroll over to y vars and select function and we want the y2 function which is the second one
and then we'll open up a parentheses and say we want to plug the x value into the y2
and we're going to divide by the y3 function at x so vars over to y vars
function y3 is the third option and we want to plug x into there
now when i hit second table let's delete out the points i don't want
in x i can put my first guess for the zero we said our zero was between our solution was
between zero and one so let's just guess maybe one for our first guess when we put one in for
our first guess newton's method says the tangent line is going to take us over to zero so that zero
becomes my next guess put zero in for the next guess and newton's method says the tangent line
pulls us over to point four that's a little closer so we'll type in point four for our next guess
now we've got point four one four one six for our next guess and that gets us a little closer
so i'll type in point four one four two one
and you notice when i type that and i get the exact same thing for my solution
that tells me i'm as close as i can get for my guess
so i'm going to come back to my whiteboard here and i'm going to summarize those results from
the calculator just to summarize we started with x1 or x0 our first guess was at one
that gave us our next guess which was at zero
our next guess the calculator gave us was point four
our next guess the calculator gave us was point four one four one six
our next guess the calculator gave us which was point four one four two one
one, and then when we plug that in, we again got 0.41421, and when we get the same thing
on it, then we say that our solution is exactly that.
x equals 0.4141421 is the solution that exists between zero and one.
L'Hopital's rule is really nice though because it even works with non-polynomial functions,
and transcendental functions that are a lot harder to work with.
So let's try the second example here, where we say the secant of x minus x squared, we
want to know when that equals five.
Well, Newton's method tells us when things are equal to zero.
So what can we do about the five?
Exactly.
We're going to subtract five from both sides to get the actual function we're going to
use Newton's method with.
So we have the secant of x minus x squared minus five equals zero, and we also need the
derivative, which is secant x tangent x minus 2x, and the derivative of the negative five
is zero.
So we're ready to go to our calculator.
First let's clear out all the old functions.
Probably could have kept y1, but it's good to practice typing it in over and over again
so you know that formula.
But just to get an idea of where it's going, in y2 we're going to type in the function,
the original function, which is secant x.
Now the calculator can't do secant x, but it can do one divided by the cosine of x, because
secant is the reciprocal of cosine, minus x squared minus five.
And when I graph this, we end up with this fancy graph, and it's going to curve across
the top to come down, and curve across the top to come down.
But let's see if we can find the zero just to the right of the axis again.
It looks like it's between one and two.
So kind of our rough sketch so that we know what we're working with.
It came down, wiggled up, and went up, and then it came back down somehow.
We're going to be specifically interested in the first one that is between one and two.
So in our y equals, y2 is the derivative.
The derivative is secant x, which is one over the cosine of x, times the tangent of x, minus
2x.
Then again in y1 we're going to type in x minus the second function, yvars function
2, at our x point, divided by our derivative function, which is in the third function,
vars, yvars function 3.
Second table, delete out all this other stuff.
And we said our first guess was between one and two, so I might try one.
You see one shoots us way out to 5.7.
That doesn't feel like it's getting closer.
In fact if I do 5.7018, that's going to shoot me back to 2.7.
So 2.7228 shoots me down to a negative number, so I'm actually on the other side.
And if I do negative 0.0015, now we're at 26,000, boy one's not getting me closer.
What that means is either I'm not close enough to my point, or the slope at my guess is too
steep that it's throwing me way out of whack and I'm not getting anywhere.
So we said it's between one and two, let's try two.
Two shoots me all the way up to 11, and you can already see kind of the same thing beginning
to happen.
We type in the next point, which shoots me over to 9.7, 9.7617 shoots me over to 4.6673,
shoots me to 4.5696, shoots me over to 4.0024, now I'm back at 1.69, I'm all over the map.
So let's try a better strategy.
I'm not close enough to the point I want, but we know the point is between one and two.
So let's try right in the middle of one and two, 1.5, ah look at that, it keeps me close
to 1.5, we're at 1.46, I feel better for that.
So let's try 1.4649, and that gives me 1.43.
Notice we're staying very close, that's what we want, 1.429, 1.4283, and notice that tangent
line is going to be exactly the same.
We finally got close enough that we found our zero.
I do want to make sure I'm showing my work, so I'm going to list out my guesses.
My first guess we started at 1.5, my next guess shot us down to 1.4649, my x2 gave me
1.438, x3 gave me 1.429, x4 gave me 1.4283, and x5 gave me 1.4283 again, which was the
same.
So my solution that's between 1 and 2 is actually at 1.4283, and that is how we do Newton's
method.
Newton's method just is taking us graphically from a guess to getting closer with the tangent
line, then we use the tangent line to get closer, and the tangent line to get closer
until we finally find the zero that we're looking for.
Worry you have the advantage of using a calculator to make that process easier, but go ahead and
practice a few, make sure you're comfortable with it, and we'll take a look at it in class,
and we will see you then.
One last thing that I want to do before we wrap up derivatives, and begins to take a preview
of what is coming in our second quarter of calculus, is looking at what is called the
anti-derivative, or really how we answer the question, how do we find derivatives in reverse?
And that derivative in reverse is what we call the anti-derivative.
And we say that the anti-derivative of f of x, lower case f of x, is the function f of
x, but notice it's capital f of x, whose derivative is the lower case f of x. In other words,
if capital f of x, the derivative of that is lower case f of x, then the capital f of
x is the anti-derivative of the f of x. Maybe it's better with an example. How about we
consider f of x equals 3x squared. Now, based on our power rule, which we know, but we're
going to do it in reverse, we can conclude that capital f of x, the anti-derivative, must
be equal to x cubed, because notice the derivative of x cubed is 3x squared. So the anti-derivative
of 3x squared is x cubed. It's the process in reverse. However, there's something we
need to note. What if capital f of x equaled not just x cubed, but x cubed minus 1? Or
if capital f of x equaled maybe x cubed plus 7? If we took the derivative of both of these,
the derivative of the x cubed is the 3x squared we want, and the derivative of the negative
one is 0. Similarly, with the other equation, with the plus 7, the derivative of x cubed
is 3x squared, and the derivative of the 7 goes to 0. So we actually ended up with three
potential anti-derivatives of 3x squared. We've got just x cubed, x cubed minus 1, or x cubed
plus 7. And actually, you can see that we could extend that concept to basically say
we could add any constant number to the x cubed, and we would still have an anti-derivative.
Let's note that. We can add any constant, and we'll call that constant c, to any anti-derivative.
That means we're going to have to note that in our final solution. So when we say the
anti-derivative, actually let's write this down. Different color. So the anti-derivative
of 3x squared is x cubed plus any constant. So let's see if we can kind of use what we
know about derivatives and apply those rules in reverse. Let's see if we can do a few examples.
Let's say f of x equals 5x to the fourth. Capital f of x, the anti-derivative then.
We know that with the power rule, the exponent moves out front and reduces by 1. So we can
see the power of 5 moved out front and then it shrunk 1 from 5 down to 4. So capital f
of x, the anti-derivative, must be x to the fifth plus any constant. Let's try another
one. Let's say f of x is equal to 1 over x. Well we recognize 1 over x as the derivative
of one of our special functions. 1 over x is the derivative of the natural log of x.
So the anti-derivative must be the natural log of x plus any constant. What about trig?
Let's do f of x equals sine of x. What is the anti-derivative? We're really asking whose
derivative is the sine of x? Well we know the sine of x is the derivative of cosine
of x, but there's that extra negative. The derivative of cosine is negative sine, so
we might assume the derivative of negative cosine then must be the positive sine. And
of course it's going to be plus any constant. What about f of x equals e to the x? Well
this is our favorite function because the derivative is itself and so likewise the anti-derivative
will be itself plus any constant. So we've been kind of playing with this idea of an
anti-derivative of just kind of thinking the derivative of what should equal this, what
do we know about derivatives, what patterns can we notice to kind of come up with the
solution. But let's formalize what we're doing here with the formal notation for these anti-derivatives.
The formal notation is we'll use this little squiggly sign. That squiggly sign we call
the integral. The integral of f of x, and then we'll put a dx so we know the variable
we're taking the integral of with respect to x. The integral of f of x dx is going to
be equal to that capital F of x plus a constant. That integral sign tells us find the anti-derivative.
And just like we have a bunch of derivative rules like the derivative off to the side
here, like if we want the derivative of x squared that's equal to 2x. We've got those
derivative rules. We also have integral rules as well. And we have one for powers, the power
rule. The power rule says the integral of x to any exponent dx is equal to, well let's
see if we can piece this together. The derivative makes the exponent shrink by one, so we need
the exponent to go up by one. Of course the derivative says the exponent is multiplied
out front, so we're going to divide by that new exponent. And with integrals there's
always a plus c. This is the power rule, a useful formula to be able to use quite quickly.
And just like we use the power rule with derivatives a lot, we're going to use the power rule with
integrals a lot. There's actually a whole lot of integral rules. Just to give you a
taste here, this table is copied out of your textbook. So, I'll put a number 2 here maybe,
c textbook for more integral rules. And this table is in 4.10 and you can see this table,
and it kind of takes the differentiation formula which we're familiar with and does it backwards
with an integration formula. The second one is the power rule that we just solved. So there's
lots of formulas in there, but we're going to focus mainly on the power rule. Let's see
if we can find the integral of 7x cubed minus 5x squared plus 2x minus 7 dx. We'll take
this one term at a time. With the 7x cubed, we keep the 7, the constant out front, the
x cubed goes up to 4, and then we divide by that new exponent. Then we have minus 5x
squared, now it goes up because we're doing the antiderivative, goes up to 3, and we divide
by that exponent. Plus 2x, we increase the exponent by 1, so now it's squared, and we
divide by the exponent. Minus 7, increase the exponent by 1, right now it was x to the
zero, that's why it's not there. Increase it by 1, we have x to the first, and we divide
by 1. We don't really need to say the divide by 1, but the 2 over 2 does reduce, and so
our final integral is 7x to the fourth over 4, minus 5x to the third over 3, plus x squared
minus 7x, and don't forget, we always need with integrals and antiderivatives, a plus
c. We can use the power rule to even integrate some more interesting looking things.
Like for instance, the integral of x cubed minus 2 times the fourth root of x over x
squared dx. Now to help us out here, we're going to massage the function a little bit
to make it something we can use in our power rule. One thing we can do because of the minus
in there is we can distribute the divide by x squared onto both parts, so we actually
have the integral of x cubed over x squared minus 2, and let's change that fourth root
to an exponent, x to the one fourth over x squared dx. Well we can continue to simplify
by subtracting exponents. x cubed over x squared is just x minus 2x to the one fourth
minus 2. Well 2 is eight fourths, so one fourth minus eight fourths is negative seven fourths
power dx. Moving up to give us a little more room, let's take the derivative now, or the
integral, for the x, we raise the exponent by 1 to get x squared, and divide by 2 minus
2x, and then we raise the exponent by 1, or four fourths, to get negative three fourths,
and divide by the new exponent of negative three fourths. Of course there's going to
be a plus c at the end, never forget the plus c. Cleaning up a little bit, we've got a negative
that makes it positive. Dividing by a fraction means multiplying by the reciprocal, so let's
multiply by four thirds instead. So we have x squared over 2, plus 2 times 4 is 8, negative
exponent moves it down, x to the three fourths, plus a constant, and so we have x squared
over 2, plus 8x, 8 over 3x to the three fourths, plus our constant. Let's try one more. Let's
see if we can do a trig one. The integral of cosine of 3x dx. Now I know the antiderivative
of cosine, or what's going to give me cosine when I take the derivative, that's going to
be the sine. So I might think maybe sine 3x plus c is my integral, and you'd be very close
if you said that. But remember the chain rule says if we take the derivative of sine of
x, the derivative of sine of 3x would be cosine of 3x times the derivative of the inside,
which would be times three. So we have to undo that times three, and the best way to
undo times three is to divide by three. So the integral or antiderivative of cosine 3x
is the sine of 3x divided by three, plus a constant. Take a look at some of these in
the assignment as you practice a few of these. These antiderivatives or integrals are really
about pattern recognition. Trying something out and seeing that's close, how can I adjust
to get closer until you get something that is correct? In Calc 2 we'll talk about a lot
of strategies to make some of this easier, but for now we want to kind of get some exposure
and some experience with integrals and antiderivatives. So take a few of these, and we will see you
in class to discuss them further.